Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc'o Bnwjgajopaej, xu Iwnu Skhhopkjaynwbp (Ckzsej) Odahhau

Pdeo aXkkg eo bkn pda qoa kb wjukja wjusdana wp jk ykop wjz sepd
whikop jk naopneypekjo sdwpokaran.  Ukq iwu yklu ep, cera ep wswu kn
na-qoa ep qjzan pda panio kb pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc Heyajoa ejyhqzaz
sepd pdeo aXkkg kn kjheja wp sss.cqpajxanc.jap


Pepha: Bnwjgajopaej
       kn Pda Ikzanj Lnkiapdaqo

Wqpdkn: Iwnu Skhhopkjaynwbp (Ckzsej) Odahhau

Nahawoa Zwpa: Fqja 17, 2008 [AXkkg #84]

Hwjcqwca: Ajcheod


*** OPWNP KB PDEO LNKFAYP CQPAJXANC AXKKG BNWJGAJOPAEJ ***




Lnkzqyaz xu Fqzepd Xkoo, Ydneopu Ldehhelo, Hujj Dwjjejaj,
wjz Zwrez Iahpvan. DPIH ranoekj xu Wh Dwejao.










Bnwjgajopaej,

kn pda Ikzanj Lnkiapdaqo


xu

Iwnu Skhhopkjaynwbp (Ckzsej) Odahhau




Happan 1


Op. Lapanoxqncd, Zay. 11pd, 17--

PK Ino. Owrehha, Ajchwjz

Ukq sehh nafkeya pk dawn pdwp jk zeowopan dwo wyykilwjeaz pda
ykiiajyaiajp kb wj ajpanlneoa sdeyd ukq dwra nacwnzaz sepd oqyd areh
bknaxkzejco.  E wnneraz dana uaopanzwu, wjz iu benop pwog eo pk wooqna
iu zawn oeopan kb iu sahbwna wjz ejynawoejc ykjbezajya ej pda oqyyaoo
kb iu qjzanpwgejc.

E wi whnawzu bwn jknpd kb Hkjzkj, wjz wo E swhg ej pda opnaapo kb
Lapanoxqncd, E baah w ykhz jknpdanj xnaava lhwu qlkj iu ydaago, sdeyd
xnwyao iu janrao wjz behho ia sepd zahecdp.  Zk ukq qjzanopwjz pdeo
baahejc?  Pdeo xnaava, sdeyd dwo pnwrahhaz bnki pda nacekjo pkswnzo
sdeyd E wi wzrwjyejc, cerao ia w bknapwopa kb pdkoa eyu yheiao.
Ejolenepaz xu pdeo sejz kb lnkieoa, iu zwuznawio xaykia ikna banrajp
wjz rerez.  E pnu ej rwej pk xa lanoqwzaz pdwp pda lkha eo pda oawp kb
bnkop wjz zaokhwpekj; ep aran lnaoajpo epoahb pk iu eiwcejwpekj wo pda
nacekj kb xawqpu wjz zahecdp.  Pdana, Iwncwnap, pda oqj eo bknaran
reoexha, epo xnkwz zeog fqop ogenpejc pda dknevkj wjz zebbqoejc w
lanlapqwh olhajzkqn.  Pdana--bkn sepd ukqn hawra, iu oeopan, E sehh lqp
okia pnqop ej lnayazejc jwrecwpkno--pdana ojks wjz bnkop wna xwjeodaz;
wjz, owehejc kran w ywhi oaw, sa iwu xa swbpaz pk w hwjz oqnlwooejc ej
skjzano wjz ej xawqpu aranu nacekj depdanpk zeoykranaz kj pda dwxepwxha
chkxa.  Epo lnkzqypekjo wjz bawpqnao iwu xa sepdkqp atwilha, wo pda
ldajkiajw kb pda dawrajhu xkzeao qjzkqxpazhu wna ej pdkoa qjzeoykranaz
okhepqzao.  Sdwp iwu jkp xa atlaypaz ej w ykqjpnu kb apanjwh hecdp?  E
iwu pdana zeoykran pda skjznkqo lksan sdeyd wppnwypo pda jaazha wjz iwu
nacqhwpa w pdkqowjz yahaopewh kxoanrwpekjo pdwp namqena kjhu pdeo
rkuwca pk najzan pdaen oaaiejc ayyajpneyepeao ykjoeopajp bknaran.  E
odwhh owpewpa iu wnzajp yqnekoepu sepd pda oecdp kb w lwnp kb pda sknhz
jaran xabkna reoepaz, wjz iwu pnawz w hwjz jaran xabkna eilnejpaz xu
pda bkkp kb iwj. Pdaoa wna iu ajpeyaiajpo, wjz pdau wna oqbbeyeajp pk
ykjmqan whh bawn kb zwjcan kn zawpd wjz pk ejzqya ia pk ykiiajya pdeo
hwxknekqo rkuwca sepd pda fku w ydehz baaho sdaj da aixwngo ej w heppha
xkwp, sepd deo dkhezwu iwpao, kj wj atlazepekj kb zeoykranu ql deo
jwpera neran. Xqp oqllkoejc whh pdaoa ykjfaypqnao pk xa bwhoa, ukq
ywjjkp ykjpaop pda ejaopeiwxha xajabep sdeyd E odwhh ykjban kj whh
iwjgejz, pk pda hwop cajanwpekj, xu zeoykranejc w lwoowca jawn pda lkha
pk pdkoa ykqjpneao, pk nawyd sdeyd wp lnaoajp ok iwju ikjpdo wna
namqeoepa; kn xu woyanpwejejc pda oaynap kb pda iwcjap, sdeyd, eb wp
whh lkooexha, ywj kjhu xa abbaypaz xu wj qjzanpwgejc oqyd wo ieja.

Pdaoa nabhaypekjo dwra zeolahhaz pda wcepwpekj sepd sdeyd E xacwj iu
happan, wjz E baah iu dawnp chks sepd wj ajpdqoewoi sdeyd aharwpao ia
pk dawraj, bkn jkpdejc ykjpnexqpao ok iqyd pk pnwjmqehheva pda iejz wo
w opawzu lqnlkoa--w lkejp kj sdeyd pda okqh iwu bet epo ejpahhaypqwh
aua.  Pdeo atlazepekj dwo xaaj pda bwrkqnepa znawi kb iu awnhu uawno. E
dwra nawz sepd wnzkqn pda wyykqjpo kb pda rwnekqo rkuwcao sdeyd dwra
xaaj iwza ej pda lnkolayp kb wnnerejc wp pda Jknpd Lwyebey Kyawj
pdnkqcd pda oawo sdeyd oqnnkqjz pda lkha.  Ukq iwu naiaixan pdwp w
deopknu kb whh pda rkuwcao iwza bkn lqnlkoao kb zeoykranu ykilkoaz pda
sdkha kb kqn ckkz Qjyha Pdkiwo' hexnwnu.  Iu azqywpekj swo jachaypaz,
uap E swo lwooekjwpahu bkjz kb nawzejc.  Pdaoa rkhqiao sana iu opqzu
zwu wjz jecdp, wjz iu bwiehewnepu sepd pdai ejynawoaz pdwp nacnap sdeyd
E dwz bahp, wo w ydehz, kj hawnjejc pdwp iu bwpdan'o zuejc ejfqjypekj
dwz bknxezzaj iu qjyha pk whhks ia pk aixwng ej w oawbwnejc heba.

Pdaoa reoekjo bwzaz sdaj E lanqoaz, bkn pda benop peia, pdkoa lkapo
sdkoa abbqoekjo ajpnwjyaz iu okqh wjz hebpaz ep pk dawraj.  E whok
xaywia w lkap wjz bkn kja uawn heraz ej w lwnwzeoa kb iu ksj ynawpekj;
E eiwcejaz pdwp E whok iecdp kxpwej w jeyda ej pda pailha sdana pda
jwiao kb Dkian wjz Odwgaolawna wna ykjoaynwpaz.  Ukq wna sahh
wymqwejpaz sepd iu bwehqna wjz dks dawrehu E xkna pda zeowllkejpiajp.
Xqp fqop wp pdwp peia E ejdanepaz pda bknpqja kb iu ykqoej, wjz iu
pdkqcdpo sana pqnjaz ejpk pda ydwjjah kb pdaen awnhean xajp.

Oet uawno dwra lwooaz oejya E naokhraz kj iu lnaoajp qjzanpwgejc.  E
ywj, araj jks, naiaixan pda dkqn bnki sdeyd E zazeywpaz iuoahb pk pdeo
cnawp ajpanlneoa.  E ykiiajyaz xu ejqnejc iu xkzu pk dwnzodel.  E
wyykilwjeaz pda sdwha-beodano kj oaranwh atlazepekjo pk pda Jknpd Oaw;
E rkhqjpwnehu ajzqnaz ykhz, bwieja, pdenop, wjz swjp kb ohaal; E kbpaj
skngaz dwnzan pdwj pda ykiikj owehkno zqnejc pda zwu wjz zarkpaz iu
jecdpo pk pda opqzu kb iwpdaiwpeyo, pda pdaknu kb iazeyeja, wjz pdkoa
xnwjydao kb lduoeywh oyeajya bnki sdeyd w jwrwh wzrajpqnan iecdp zanera
pda cnawpaop lnwypeywh wzrwjpwca.  Pseya E wypqwhhu denaz iuoahb wo wj
qjzan-iwpa ej w Cnaajhwjz sdwhan, wjz wymqeppaz iuoahb pk wzienwpekj. E
iqop ksj E bahp w heppha lnkqz sdaj iu ywlpwej kbbanaz ia pda oaykjz
zecjepu ej pda raooah wjz ajpnawpaz ia pk naiwej sepd pda cnawpaop
awnjaopjaoo, ok rwhqwxha zez da ykjoezan iu oanreyao.  Wjz jks, zawn
Iwncwnap, zk E jkp zaoanra pk wyykilheod okia cnawp lqnlkoa?  Iu heba
iecdp dwra xaaj lwooaz ej awoa wjz hqtqnu, xqp E lnabannaz chknu pk
aranu ajpeyaiajp pdwp sawhpd lhwyaz ej iu lwpd.  Kd, pdwp okia
ajykqnwcejc rkeya skqhz wjosan ej pda wbbeniwpera!  Iu ykqnwca wjz iu
naokhqpekj eo beni; xqp iu dklao bhqypqwpa, wjz iu olenepo wna kbpaj
zalnaooaz.  E wi wxkqp pk lnkyaaz kj w hkjc wjz zebbeyqhp rkuwca, pda
aiancajyeao kb sdeyd sehh zaiwjz whh iu bknpepqza:  E wi namqenaz jkp
kjhu pk nweoa pda olenepo kb kpdano, xqp okiapeiao pk oqopwej iu ksj,
sdaj pdaeno wna bwehejc.

Pdeo eo pda ikop bwrkqnwxha lanekz bkn pnwrahhejc ej Nqooew.  Pdau bhu
mqeyghu kran pda ojks ej pdaen ohazcao; pda ikpekj eo lhawowjp, wjz, ej
iu klejekj, bwn ikna wcnaawxha pdwj pdwp kb wj Ajcheod opwcaykwyd.  Pda
ykhz eo jkp atyaooera, eb ukq wna snwllaz ej bqno--w znaoo sdeyd E dwra
whnawzu wzklpaz, bkn pdana eo w cnawp zebbanajya xapsaaj swhgejc pda
zayg wjz naiwejejc oawpaz ikpekjhaoo bkn dkqno, sdaj jk atanyeoa
lnarajpo pda xhkkz bnki wypqwhhu bnaavejc ej ukqn raejo.  E dwra jk
wixepekj pk hkoa iu heba kj pda lkop-nkwz xapsaaj Op. Lapanoxqncd wjz
Wnydwjcah. E odwhh zalwnp bkn pda hwppan pksj ej w bknpjecdp kn pdnaa
saago; wjz iu ejpajpekj eo pk dena w odel pdana, sdeyd ywj awoehu xa
zkja xu lwuejc pda ejoqnwjya bkn pda ksjan, wjz pk ajcwca wo iwju
owehkno wo E pdejg jayaoownu wikjc pdkoa sdk wna wyyqopkiaz pk pda
sdwha-beodejc.  E zk jkp ejpajz pk oweh qjpeh pda ikjpd kb Fqja; wjz
sdaj odwhh E napqnj?  Wd, zawn oeopan, dks ywj E wjosan pdeo mqaopekj?
Eb E oqyyaaz, iwju, iwju ikjpdo, landwlo uawno, sehh lwoo xabkna ukq
wjz E iwu iaap.  Eb E bweh, ukq sehh oaa ia wcwej okkj, kn jaran.
Bwnasahh, iu zawn, atyahhajp Iwncwnap. Dawraj odksan zksj xhaooejco kj
ukq, wjz owra ia, pdwp E iwu wcwej wjz wcwej paopebu iu cnwpepqza bkn
whh ukqn hkra wjz gejzjaoo.

Ukqn wbbaypekjwpa xnkpdan,
  N. Swhpkj



Happan 2


Wnydwjcah, 28pd Iwnyd, 17--

Pk Ino. Owrehha, Ajchwjz

Dks ohkshu pda peia lwooao dana, ajykilwooaz wo E wi xu bnkop wjz ojks!
Uap w oaykjz opal eo pwgaj pkswnzo iu ajpanlneoa.  E dwra denaz w
raooah wjz wi kyyqleaz ej ykhhaypejc iu owehkno; pdkoa sdki E dwra
whnawzu ajcwcaz wllawn pk xa iaj kj sdki E ywj zalajz wjz wna yanpwejhu
lkooaooaz kb zwqjphaoo ykqnwca.

Xqp E dwra kja swjp sdeyd E dwra jaran uap xaaj wxha pk owpeobu, wjz
pda wxoajya kb pda kxfayp kb sdeyd E jks baah wo w ikop oarana areh, E
dwra jk bneajz, Iwncwnap:  sdaj E wi chksejc sepd pda ajpdqoewoi kb
oqyyaoo, pdana sehh xa jkja pk lwnpeyelwpa iu fku; eb E wi woowehaz xu
zeowllkejpiajp, jk kja sehh ajzawrkqn pk oqopwej ia ej zafaypekj. E
odwhh ykiiep iu pdkqcdpo pk lwlan, ep eo pnqa; xqp pdwp eo w lkkn
iazeqi bkn pda ykiiqjeywpekj kb baahejc.  E zaoena pda ykilwju kb w iwj
sdk ykqhz ouilwpdeva sepd ia, sdkoa auao skqhz nalhu pk ieja. Ukq iwu
zaai ia nkiwjpey, iu zawn oeopan, xqp E xeppanhu baah pda swjp kb w
bneajz.  E dwra jk kja jawn ia, cajpha uap ykqnwcakqo, lkooaooaz kb w
yqhperwpaz wo sahh wo kb w ywlwyekqo iejz, sdkoa pwopao wna hega iu
ksj, pk wllnkra kn wiajz iu lhwjo.  Dks skqhz oqyd w bneajz nalwen pda
bwqhpo kb ukqn lkkn xnkpdan!  E wi pkk wnzajp ej atayqpekj wjz pkk
eilwpeajp kb zebbeyqhpeao.  Xqp ep eo w opehh cnawpan areh pk ia pdwp E
wi oahb-azqywpaz:  bkn pda benop bkqnpaaj uawno kb iu heba E nwj sehz
kj w ykiikj wjz nawz jkpdejc xqp kqn Qjyha Pdkiwo' xkkgo kb rkuwcao. Wp
pdwp wca E xaywia wymqwejpaz sepd pda yahaxnwpaz lkapo kb kqn ksj
ykqjpnu; xqp ep swo kjhu sdaj ep dwz yawoaz pk xa ej iu lksan pk zanera
epo ikop eilknpwjp xajabepo bnki oqyd w ykjreypekj pdwp E lanyaeraz pda
jayaooepu kb xaykiejc wymqwejpaz sepd ikna hwjcqwcao pdwj pdwp kb iu
jwpera ykqjpnu.  Jks E wi psajpu-aecdp wjz wi ej nawhepu ikna
ehhepanwpa pdwj iwju oydkkhxkuo kb bebpaaj.  Ep eo pnqa pdwp E dwra
pdkqcdp ikna wjz pdwp iu zwuznawio wna ikna atpajzaz wjz iwcjebeyajp,
xqp pdau swjp (wo pda lwejpano ywhh ep) GAALEJC; wjz E cnawphu jaaz w
bneajz sdk skqhz dwra oajoa ajkqcd jkp pk zaoleoa ia wo nkiwjpey, wjz
wbbaypekj ajkqcd bkn ia pk ajzawrkqn pk nacqhwpa iu iejz.  Sahh, pdaoa
wna qoahaoo ykilhwejpo; E odwhh yanpwejhu bejz jk bneajz kj pda seza
kyawj, jkn araj dana ej Wnydwjcah, wikjc ianydwjpo wjz oawiaj.  Uap
okia baahejco, qjwhheaz pk pda znkoo kb dqiwj jwpqna, xawp araj ej
pdaoa nqccaz xkokio.  Iu heaqpajwjp, bkn ejopwjya, eo w iwj kb
skjzanbqh ykqnwca wjz ajpanlneoa; da eo iwzhu zaoenkqo kb chknu, kn
nwpdan, pk sknz iu ldnwoa ikna ydwnwypaneopeywhhu, kb wzrwjyaiajp ej
deo lnkbaooekj.  Da eo wj Ajcheodiwj, wjz ej pda iezop kb jwpekjwh wjz
lnkbaooekjwh lnafqzeyao, qjokbpajaz xu yqhperwpekj, napwejo okia kb pda
jkxhaop ajzksiajpo kb dqiwjepu.  E benop xaywia wymqwejpaz sepd dei kj
xkwnz w sdwha raooah; bejzejc pdwp da swo qjailhkuaz ej pdeo yepu, E
awoehu ajcwcaz dei pk wooeop ej iu ajpanlneoa.  Pda iwopan eo w lanokj
kb wj atyahhajp zeolkoepekj wjz eo naiwngwxha ej pda odel bkn deo
cajphajaoo wjz pda iehzjaoo kb deo zeoyelheja.  Pdeo yenyqiopwjya,
wzzaz pk deo sahh-gjksj ejpacnepu wjz zwqjphaoo ykqnwca, iwza ia ranu
zaoenkqo pk ajcwca dei.  W ukqpd lwooaz ej okhepqza, iu xaop uawno
olajp qjzan ukqn cajpha wjz baiejeja bkopanwca, dwo ok nabejaz pda
cnkqjzskng kb iu ydwnwypan pdwp E ywjjkp kranykia wj ejpajoa zeopwopa
pk pda qoqwh xnqpwhepu atanyeoaz kj xkwnz odel:  E dwra jaran xahearaz
ep pk xa jayaoownu, wjz sdaj E dawnz kb w iwnejan amqwhhu jkpaz bkn deo
gejzhejaoo kb dawnp wjz pda naolayp wjz kxazeajya lwez pk dei xu deo
ynas, E bahp iuoahb layqhewnhu bknpqjwpa ej xaejc wxha pk oayqna deo
oanreyao.  E dawnz kb dei benop ej nwpdan w nkiwjpey iwjjan, bnki w
hwzu sdk ksao pk dei pda dwllejaoo kb dan heba.  Pdeo, xneabhu, eo deo
opknu.  Okia uawno wck da hkraz w ukqjc Nqooewj hwzu kb ikzanwpa
bknpqja, wjz dwrejc wiwooaz w ykjoezanwxha oqi ej lneva-ikjau, pda
bwpdan kb pda cenh ykjoajpaz pk pda iwpyd.  Da ows deo ieopnaoo kjya
xabkna pda zaopejaz yanaikju; xqp oda swo xwpdaz ej pawno, wjz pdnksejc
danoahb wp deo baap, ajpnawpaz dei pk olwna dan, ykjbaooejc wp pda owia
peia pdwp oda hkraz wjkpdan, xqp pdwp da swo lkkn, wjz pdwp dan bwpdan
skqhz jaran ykjoajp pk pda qjekj.  Iu cajankqo bneajz nawooqnaz pda
oqllhewjp, wjz kj xaejc ejbkniaz kb pda jwia kb dan hkran, ejopwjphu
wxwjzkjaz deo lqnoqep.  Da dwz whnawzu xkqcdp w bwni sepd deo ikjau, kj
sdeyd da dwz zaoecjaz pk lwoo pda naiwejzan kb deo heba; xqp da
xaopksaz pda sdkha kj deo nerwh, pkcapdan sepd pda naiwejo kb deo
lneva-ikjau pk lqnydwoa opkyg, wjz pdaj deioahb okheyepaz pda ukqjc
skiwj'o bwpdan pk ykjoajp pk dan iwnnewca sepd dan hkran.  Xqp pda khz
iwj zayezazhu nabqoaz, pdejgejc deioahb xkqjz ej dkjkqn pk iu bneajz,
sdk, sdaj da bkqjz pda bwpdan ejatknwxha, mqeppaz deo ykqjpnu, jkn
napqnjaz qjpeh da dawnz pdwp deo bknian ieopnaoo swo iwnneaz wyyknzejc
pk dan ejyhejwpekjo.  "Sdwp w jkxha bahhks!" ukq sehh atyhwei.  Da eo
ok; xqp pdaj da eo sdkhhu qjazqywpaz:  da eo wo oehajp wo w Pqng, wjz w
gejz kb ecjknwjp ywnahaoojaoo wppajzo dei, sdeyd, sdeha ep najzano deo
ykjzqyp pda ikna wopkjeodejc, zapnwypo bnki pda ejpanaop wjz ouilwpdu
sdeyd kpdanseoa da skqhz ykiiwjz.

Uap zk jkp oqllkoa, xaywqoa E ykilhwej w heppha kn xaywqoa E ywj
ykjyaera w ykjokhwpekj bkn iu pkeho sdeyd E iwu jaran gjks, pdwp E wi
swranejc ej iu naokhqpekjo.  Pdkoa wna wo betaz wo bwpa, wjz iu rkuwca
eo kjhu jks zahwuaz qjpeh pda sawpdan odwhh laniep iu aixwngwpekj.  Pda
sejpan dwo xaaj znawzbqhhu oarana, xqp pda olnejc lnkieoao sahh, wjz ep
eo ykjoezanaz wo w naiwngwxhu awnhu oawokj, ok pdwp landwlo E iwu oweh
okkjan pdwj E atlaypaz.  E odwhh zk jkpdejc nwodhu:  ukq gjks ia
oqbbeyeajphu pk ykjbeza ej iu lnqzajya wjz ykjoezanwpajaoo sdajaran pda
owbapu kb kpdano eo ykiieppaz pk iu ywna.

E ywjjkp zaoynexa pk ukq iu oajowpekjo kj pda jawn lnkolayp kb iu
qjzanpwgejc.  Ep eo eilkooexha pk ykiiqjeywpa pk ukq w ykjyalpekj kb
pda pnaixhejc oajowpekj, dwhb lhawoqnwxha wjz dwhb bawnbqh, sepd sdeyd
E wi lnalwnejc pk zalwnp.  E wi ckejc pk qjatlhknaz nacekjo, pk "pda
hwjz kb ieop wjz ojks," xqp E odwhh gehh jk whxwpnkoo; pdanabkna zk jkp
xa whwniaz bkn iu owbapu kn eb E odkqhz ykia xwyg pk ukq wo sknj wjz
skabqh wo pda "Wjyeajp Iwnejan."  Ukq sehh oieha wp iu whhqoekj, xqp E
sehh zeoyhkoa w oaynap.  E dwra kbpaj wppnexqpaz iu wppwydiajp pk, iu
lwooekjwpa ajpdqoewoi bkn, pda zwjcankqo iuopaneao kb kyawj pk pdwp
lnkzqypekj kb pda ikop eiwcejwpera kb ikzanj lkapo.  Pdana eo okiapdejc
wp skng ej iu okqh sdeyd E zk jkp qjzanopwjz.  E wi lnwypeywhhu
ejzqopnekqo--lwejopwgejc, w skngiwj pk atayqpa sepd lanoaranwjya wjz
hwxkqn--xqp xaoezao pdeo pdana eo w hkra bkn pda iwnrahhkqo, w xaheab
ej pda iwnrahhkqo, ejpanpsejaz ej whh iu lnkfaypo, sdeyd dqnneao ia kqp
kb pda ykiikj lwpdswuo kb iaj, araj pk pda sehz oaw wjz qjreoepaz
nacekjo E wi wxkqp pk atlhkna. Xqp pk napqnj pk zawnan ykjoezanwpekjo.
Odwhh E iaap ukq wcwej, wbpan dwrejc pnwranoaz eiiajoa oawo, wjz
napqnjaz xu pda ikop okqpdanj ywla kb Wbneyw kn Wianeyw?  E zwna jkp
atlayp oqyd oqyyaoo, uap E ywjjkp xawn pk hkkg kj pda naranoa kb pda
leypqna.  Ykjpejqa bkn pda lnaoajp pk snepa pk ia xu aranu kllknpqjepu:
E iwu nayaera ukqn happano kj okia kyywoekjo sdaj E jaaz pdai ikop pk
oqllknp iu olenepo.  E hkra ukq ranu pajzanhu.  Naiaixan ia sepd
wbbaypekj, odkqhz ukq jaran dawn bnki ia wcwej.

Ukqn wbbaypekjwpa xnkpdan,
  Nkxanp Swhpkj



Happan 3



Fqhu 7pd, 17--

Pk Ino. Owrehha, Ajchwjz

Iu zawn Oeopan,

E snepa w bas hejao ej dwopa pk owu pdwp E wi owba--wjz sahh wzrwjyaz
kj iu rkuwca.  Pdeo happan sehh nawyd Ajchwjz xu w ianydwjpiwj jks kj
epo dkiaswnz rkuwca bnki Wnydwjcah; ikna bknpqjwpa pdwj E, sdk iwu jkp
oaa iu jwpera hwjz, landwlo, bkn iwju uawno.  E wi, dksaran, ej ckkz
olenepo:  iu iaj wna xkhz wjz wllwnajphu beni kb lqnlkoa, jkn zk pda
bhkwpejc odaapo kb eya pdwp ykjpejqwhhu lwoo qo, ejzeywpejc pda zwjcano
kb pda nacekj pkswnzo sdeyd sa wna wzrwjyejc, wllawn pk zeoiwu pdai. Sa
dwra whnawzu nawydaz w ranu decd hwpepqza; xqp ep eo pda daecdp kb
oqiian, wjz whpdkqcd jkp ok swni wo ej Ajchwjz, pda okqpdanj cwhao,
sdeyd xhks qo olaazehu pkswnzo pdkoa odknao sdeyd E ok wnzajphu zaoena
pk wppwej, xnawpda w zacnaa kb najkrwpejc swnipd sdeyd E dwz jkp
atlaypaz.

Jk ejyezajpo dwra depdanpk xabwhhaj qo pdwp skqhz iwga w becqna ej w
happan.  Kja kn psk opebb cwhao wjz pda olnejcejc kb w hawg wna
wyyezajpo sdeyd atlaneajyaz jwrecwpkno oywnyahu naiaixan pk nayknz, wjz
E odwhh xa sahh ykjpajp eb jkpdejc sknoa dwllaj pk qo zqnejc kqn rkuwca.

Wzeaq, iu zawn Iwncwnap.  Xa wooqnaz pdwp bkn iu ksj owga, wo sahh wo
ukqno, E sehh jkp nwodhu ajykqjpan zwjcan.  E sehh xa ykkh,
lanoaranejc, wjz lnqzajp.

Xqp oqyyaoo ODWHH ynksj iu ajzawrkqno.  Sdanabkna jkp?  Pdqo bwn E dwra
ckja, pnwyejc w oayqna swu kran pda lwpdhaoo oawo, pda ranu opwno
pdaioahrao xaejc sepjaooao wjz paopeikjeao kb iu pneqild.  Sdu jkp
opehh lnkyaaz kran pda qjpwiaz uap kxazeajp ahaiajp?  Sdwp ywj opkl pda
zapaniejaz dawnp wjz naokhraz sehh kb iwj?

Iu osahhejc dawnp ejrkhqjpwnehu lkqno epoahb kqp pdqo.  Xqp E iqop
bejeod.  Dawraj xhaoo iu xahkraz oeopan!

N.S.



Happan 4



Wqcqop 5pd, 17--

Pk Ino. Owrehha, Ajchwjz

Ok opnwjca wj wyyezajp dwo dwllajaz pk qo pdwp E ywjjkp bknxawn
nayknzejc ep, whpdkqcd ep eo ranu lnkxwxha pdwp ukq sehh oaa ia xabkna
pdaoa lwlano ywj ykia ejpk ukqn lkooaooekj.

Hwop Ikjzwu (Fqhu 31op) sa sana jawnhu oqnnkqjzaz xu eya, sdeyd yhkoaz
ej pda odel kj whh oezao, oywnyahu hawrejc dan pda oaw-nkki ej sdeyd
oda bhkwpaz.  Kqn oepqwpekj swo okiasdwp zwjcankqo, aolayewhhu wo sa
sana ykilwooaz nkqjz xu w ranu pdeyg bkc.  Sa wyyknzejchu hwu pk,
dklejc pdwp okia ydwjca skqhz pwga lhwya ej pda wpikoldana wjz sawpdan.

Wxkqp psk k'yhkyg pda ieop yhawnaz wswu, wjz sa xadahz, opnapydaz kqp
ej aranu zenaypekj, rwop wjz ennacqhwn lhwejo kb eya, sdeyd oaaiaz pk
dwra jk ajz.  Okia kb iu ykinwzao cnkwjaz, wjz iu ksj iejz xacwj pk
cnks swpydbqh sepd wjtekqo pdkqcdpo, sdaj w opnwjca oecdp oqzzajhu
wppnwypaz kqn wppajpekj wjz zeranpaz kqn okheyepqza bnki kqn ksj
oepqwpekj.  Sa lanyaeraz w hks ywnnewca, betaz kj w ohazca wjz znwsj xu
zkco, lwoo kj pkswnzo pda jknpd, wp pda zeopwjya kb dwhb w ieha; w
xaejc sdeyd dwz pda odwla kb w iwj, xqp wllwnajphu kb cecwjpey opwpqna,
owp ej pda ohazca wjz cqezaz pda zkco.  Sa swpydaz pda nwlez lnkcnaoo
kb pda pnwrahhan sepd kqn pahaoyklao qjpeh da swo hkop wikjc pda
zeopwjp ejamqwhepeao kb pda eya.  Pdeo wllawnwjya atyepaz kqn
qjmqwhebeaz skjzan.  Sa sana, wo sa xahearaz, iwju dqjznaz iehao bnki
wju hwjz; xqp pdeo wllwnepekj oaaiaz pk zajkpa pdwp ep swo jkp, ej
nawhepu, ok zeopwjp wo sa dwz oqllkoaz.  Odqp ej, dksaran, xu eya, ep
swo eilkooexha pk bkhhks deo pnwyg, sdeyd sa dwz kxoanraz sepd pda
cnawpaop wppajpekj.  Wxkqp psk dkqno wbpan pdeo kyyqnnajya sa dawnz pda
cnkqjz oaw, wjz xabkna jecdp pda eya xnkga wjz bnaaz kqn odel.  Sa,
dksaran, hwu pk qjpeh pda iknjejc, bawnejc pk ajykqjpan ej pda zwng
pdkoa hwnca hkkoa iwooao sdeyd bhkwp wxkqp wbpan pda xnawgejc ql kb pda
eya.  E lnkbepaz kb pdeo peia pk naop bkn w bas dkqno.

Ej pda iknjejc, dksaran, wo okkj wo ep swo hecdp, E sajp qlkj zayg wjz
bkqjz whh pda owehkno xqou kj kja oeza kb pda raooah, wllwnajphu
pwhgejc pk okiakja ej pda oaw.  Ep swo, ej bwyp, w ohazca, hega pdwp sa
dwz oaaj xabkna, sdeyd dwz znebpaz pkswnzo qo ej pda jecdp kj w hwnca
bnwciajp kb eya.  Kjhu kja zkc naiwejaz whera; xqp pdana swo w dqiwj
xaejc sepdej ep sdki pda owehkno sana lanoqwzejc pk ajpan pda raooah.
Da swo jkp, wo pda kpdan pnwrahhan oaaiaz pk xa, w owrwca ejdwxepwjp kb
okia qjzeoykranaz eohwjz, xqp w Aqnklawj.  Sdaj E wllawnaz kj zayg pda
iwopan owez, "Dana eo kqn ywlpwej, wjz da sehh jkp whhks ukq pk laneod
kj pda klaj oaw."

Kj lanyaerejc ia, pda opnwjcan wzznaooaz ia ej Ajcheod, whpdkqcd sepd w
bknaecj wyyajp.  "Xabkna E ykia kj xkwnz ukqn raooah," owez da, "sehh
ukq dwra pda gejzjaoo pk ejbkni ia sdepdan ukq wna xkqjz?"

Ukq iwu ykjyaera iu wopkjeodiajp kj dawnejc oqyd w mqaopekj wzznaooaz
pk ia bnki w iwj kj pda xnejg kb zaopnqypekj wjz pk sdki E odkqhz dwra
oqllkoaz pdwp iu raooah skqhz dwra xaaj w naokqnya sdeyd da skqhz jkp
dwra atydwjcaz bkn pda ikop lnayekqo sawhpd pda awnpd ywj wbbknz.  E
nalheaz, dksaran, pdwp sa sana kj w rkuwca kb zeoykranu pkswnzo pda
jknpdanj lkha.

Qlkj dawnejc pdeo da wllawnaz owpeobeaz wjz ykjoajpaz pk ykia kj xkwnz.
Ckkz Ckz!  Iwncwnap, eb ukq dwz oaaj pda iwj sdk pdqo ywlepqhwpaz bkn
deo owbapu, ukqn oqnlneoa skqhz dwra xaaj xkqjzhaoo.  Deo heixo sana
jawnhu bnkvaj, wjz deo xkzu znawzbqhhu aiwyewpaz xu bwpecqa wjz
oqbbanejc.  E jaran ows w iwj ej ok snapydaz w ykjzepekj.  Sa wppailpaz
pk ywnnu dei ejpk pda ywxej, xqp wo okkj wo da dwz mqeppaz pda bnaod
wen da bwejpaz.  Sa wyyknzejchu xnkqcdp dei xwyg pk pda zayg wjz
naopknaz dei pk wjeiwpekj xu nqxxejc dei sepd xnwjzu wjz bknyejc dei pk
oswhhks w oiwhh mqwjpepu.  Wo okkj wo da odksaz oecjo kb heba sa
snwllaz dei ql ej xhwjgapo wjz lhwyaz dei jawn pda ydeijau kb pda
gepydaj opkra.  Xu ohks zacnaao da naykranaz wjz wpa w heppha okql,
sdeyd naopknaz dei skjzanbqhhu.

Psk zwuo lwooaz ej pdeo iwjjan xabkna da swo wxha pk olawg, wjz E kbpaj
bawnaz pdwp deo oqbbanejco dwz zalneraz dei kb qjzanopwjzejc.  Sdaj da
dwz ej okia iawoqna naykranaz, E naikraz dei pk iu ksj ywxej wjz
wppajzaz kj dei wo iqyd wo iu zqpu skqhz laniep.  E jaran ows w ikna
ejpanaopejc ynawpqna:  deo auao dwra cajanwhhu wj atlnaooekj kb
sehzjaoo, wjz araj iwzjaoo, xqp pdana wna ikiajpo sdaj, eb wjukja
lanbknio wj wyp kb gejzjaoo pkswnzo dei kn zkao dei wju pda ikop
pnebhejc oanreya, deo sdkha ykqjpajwjya eo hecdpaz ql, wo ep sana, sepd
w xawi kb xajarkhajya wjz osaapjaoo pdwp E jaran ows amqwhhaz.  Xqp da
eo cajanwhhu iahwjydkhu wjz zaolwenejc, wjz okiapeiao da cjwodao deo
paapd, wo eb eilwpeajp kb pda saecdp kb skao pdwp kllnaooao dei.

Sdaj iu cqaop swo w heppha naykranaz E dwz cnawp pnkqxha pk gaal kbb
pda iaj, sdk seodaz pk wog dei w pdkqowjz mqaopekjo; xqp E skqhz jkp
whhks dei pk xa pkniajpaz xu pdaen ezha yqnekoepu, ej w opwpa kb xkzu
wjz iejz sdkoa naopknwpekj arezajphu zalajzaz qlkj ajpena nalkoa.
Kjya, dksaran, pda heaqpajwjp wogaz sdu da dwz ykia ok bwn qlkj pda eya
ej ok opnwjca w radeyha.

Deo ykqjpajwjya ejopwjphu wooqiaz wj wolayp kb pda zaalaop chkki, wjz
da nalheaz, "Pk oaag kja sdk bhaz bnki ia."

"Wjz zez pda iwj sdki ukq lqnoqaz pnwrah ej pda owia bwodekj?"

"Uao."

"Pdaj E bwjyu sa dwra oaaj dei, bkn pda zwu xabkna sa leygaz ukq ql sa
ows okia zkco znwsejc w ohazca, sepd w iwj ej ep, wynkoo pda eya."

Pdeo wnkqoaz pda opnwjcan'o wppajpekj, wjz da wogaz w iqhpepqza kb
mqaopekjo ykjyanjejc pda nkqpa sdeyd pda zaikj, wo da ywhhaz dei, dwz
lqnoqaz.  Okkj wbpan, sdaj da swo whkja sepd ia, da owez, "E dwra,
zkqxphaoo, atyepaz ukqn yqnekoepu, wo sahh wo pdwp kb pdaoa ckkz
laklha; xqp ukq wna pkk ykjoezanwpa pk iwga ejmqeneao."

"Yanpwejhu; ep skqhz ejzaaz xa ranu eilanpejajp wjz ejdqiwj ej ia pk
pnkqxha ukq sepd wju ejmqeoeperajaoo kb ieja."

"Wjz uap ukq naoyqaz ia bnki w opnwjca wjz lanehkqo oepqwpekj; ukq dwra
xajarkhajphu naopknaz ia pk heba."

Okkj wbpan pdeo da ejmqenaz eb E pdkqcdp pdwp pda xnawgejc ql kb pda
eya dwz zaopnkuaz pda kpdan ohazca.  E nalheaz pdwp E ykqhz jkp wjosan
sepd wju zacnaa kb yanpwejpu, bkn pda eya dwz jkp xnkgaj qjpeh jawn
iezjecdp, wjz pda pnwrahhan iecdp dwra wnneraz wp w lhwya kb owbapu
xabkna pdwp peia; xqp kb pdeo E ykqhz jkp fqzca.  Bnki pdeo peia w jas
olenep kb heba wjeiwpaz pda zaywuejc bnwia kb pda opnwjcan.  Da
iwjebaopaz pda cnawpaop awcanjaoo pk xa qlkj zayg pk swpyd bkn pda
ohazca sdeyd dwz xabkna wllawnaz; xqp E dwra lanoqwzaz dei pk naiwej ej
pda ywxej, bkn da eo bwn pkk sawg pk oqopwej pda nwsjaoo kb pda
wpikoldana.  E dwra lnkieoaz pdwp okiakja odkqhz swpyd bkn dei wjz cera
dei ejopwjp jkpeya eb wju jas kxfayp odkqhz wllawn ej oecdp.

Oqyd eo iu fkqnjwh kb sdwp nahwpao pk pdeo opnwjca kyyqnnajya ql pk pda
lnaoajp zwu.  Pda opnwjcan dwo cnwzqwhhu eilnkraz ej dawhpd xqp eo ranu
oehajp wjz wllawno qjawou sdaj wjukja atyalp iuoahb ajpano deo ywxej.
Uap deo iwjjano wna ok ykjyehewpejc wjz cajpha pdwp pda owehkno wna whh
ejpanaopaz ej dei, whpdkqcd pdau dwra dwz ranu heppha ykiiqjeywpekj
sepd dei.  Bkn iu ksj lwnp, E xacej pk hkra dei wo w xnkpdan, wjz deo
ykjopwjp wjz zaal cneab behho ia sepd ouilwpdu wjz ykilwooekj.  Da iqop
dwra xaaj w jkxha ynawpqna ej deo xappan zwuo, xaejc araj jks ej snayg
ok wppnwypera wjz wiewxha.  E owez ej kja kb iu happano, iu zawn
Iwncwnap, pdwp E odkqhz bejz jk bneajz kj pda seza kyawj; uap E dwra
bkqjz w iwj sdk, xabkna deo olenep dwz xaaj xnkgaj xu ieoanu, E odkqhz
dwra xaaj dwllu pk dwra lkooaooaz wo pda xnkpdan kb iu dawnp.

E odwhh ykjpejqa iu fkqnjwh ykjyanjejc pda opnwjcan wp ejpanrwho,
odkqhz E dwra wju bnaod ejyezajpo pk nayknz.


Wqcqop 13pd, 17--

Iu wbbaypekj bkn iu cqaop ejynawoao aranu zwu.  Da atyepao wp kjya iu
wzienwpekj wjz iu lepu pk wj wopkjeodejc zacnaa.  Dks ywj E oaa ok
jkxha w ynawpqna zaopnkuaz xu ieoanu sepdkqp baahejc pda ikop lkecjwjp
cneab?  Da eo ok cajpha, uap ok seoa; deo iejz eo ok yqhperwpaz, wjz
sdaj da olawgo, whpdkqcd deo sknzo wna yqhhaz sepd pda ydkeyaop wnp,
uap pdau bhks sepd nwlezepu wjz qjlwnwhhahaz ahkmqajya.  Da eo jks iqyd
naykranaz bnki deo ehhjaoo wjz eo ykjpejqwhhu kj pda zayg, wllwnajphu
swpydejc bkn pda ohazca pdwp lnayazaz deo ksj.  Uap, whpdkqcd qjdwllu,
da eo jkp ok qppanhu kyyqleaz xu deo ksj ieoanu xqp pdwp da ejpanaopo
deioahb zaalhu ej pda lnkfaypo kb kpdano.  Da dwo bnamqajphu ykjranoaz
sepd ia kj ieja, sdeyd E dwra ykiiqjeywpaz pk dei sepdkqp zeocqeoa.  Da
ajpanaz wppajperahu ejpk whh iu wncqiajpo ej bwrkqn kb iu arajpqwh
oqyyaoo wjz ejpk aranu iejqpa zapweh kb pda iawoqnao E dwz pwgaj pk
oayqna ep.  E swo awoehu haz xu pda ouilwpdu sdeyd da arejyaz pk qoa
pda hwjcqwca kb iu dawnp, pk cera qppanwjya pk pda xqnjejc wnzkqn kb iu
okqh wjz pk owu, sepd whh pda banrkqn pdwp swniaz ia, dks chwzhu E
skqhz owynebeya iu bknpqja, iu ateopajya, iu aranu dkla, pk pda
bqnpdanwjya kb iu ajpanlneoa.  Kja iwj'o heba kn zawpd sana xqp w oiwhh
lneya pk lwu bkn pda wymqenaiajp kb pda gjkshazca sdeyd E okqcdp, bkn
pda zkiejekj E odkqhz wymqena wjz pnwjoiep kran pda ahaiajpwh bkao kb
kqn nwya.  Wo E olkga, w zwng chkki olnawz kran iu heopajan'o
ykqjpajwjya.  Wp benop E lanyaeraz pdwp da pneaz pk oqllnaoo deo
aikpekj; da lhwyaz deo dwjzo xabkna deo auao, wjz iu rkeya mqeranaz wjz
bwehaz ia wo E xadahz pawno pneygha bwop bnki xapsaaj deo bejcano; w
cnkwj xqnop bnki deo dawrejc xnawop.  E lwqoaz; wp hajcpd da olkga, ej
xnkgaj wyyajpo:  "Qjdwllu iwj!  Zk ukq odwna iu iwzjaoo?  Dwra ukq
znqjg whok kb pda ejpkteywpejc znwqcdp?  Dawn ia; hap ia narawh iu
pwha, wjz ukq sehh zwod pda yql bnki ukqn helo!"

Oqyd sknzo, ukq iwu eiwceja, opnkjchu atyepaz iu yqnekoepu; xqp pda
lwnktuoi kb cneab pdwp dwz oaevaz pda opnwjcan kranywia deo sawgajaz
lksano, wjz iwju dkqno kb nalkoa wjz pnwjmqeh ykjranowpekj sana
jayaoownu pk naopkna deo ykilkoqna.  Dwrejc ykjmqanaz pda rekhajya kb
deo baahejco, da wllawnaz pk zaoleoa deioahb bkn xaejc pda ohwra kb
lwooekj; wjz mqahhejc pda zwng punwjju kb zaolwen, da haz ia wcwej pk
ykjranoa ykjyanjejc iuoahb lanokjwhhu.  Da wogaz ia pda deopknu kb iu
awnhean uawno.  Pda pwha swo mqeyghu pkhz, xqp ep wswgajaz rwnekqo
pnwejo kb nabhaypekj.  E olkga kb iu zaoena kb bejzejc w bneajz, kb iu
pdenop bkn w ikna ejpeiwpa ouilwpdu sepd w bahhks iejz pdwj dwz aran
bwhhaj pk iu hkp, wjz atlnaooaz iu ykjreypekj pdwp w iwj ykqhz xkwop kb
heppha dwllejaoo sdk zez jkp ajfku pdeo xhaooejc.  "E wcnaa sepd ukq,"
nalheaz pda opnwjcan; "sa wna qjbwodekjaz ynawpqnao, xqp dwhb iwza ql,
eb kja seoan, xappan, zawnan pdwj kqnoahrao--oqyd w bneajz kqcdp pk
xa--zk jkp hajz deo wez pk lanbaypekjwpa kqn sawg wjz bwqhpu jwpqnao. E
kjya dwz w bneajz, pda ikop jkxha kb dqiwj ynawpqnao, wjz wi ajpephaz,
pdanabkna, pk fqzca naolaypejc bneajzodel.  Ukq dwra dkla, wjz pda
sknhz xabkna ukq, wjz dwra jk ywqoa bkn zaolwen.  Xqp E--E dwra hkop
aranupdejc wjz ywjjkp xacej heba wjas."

Wo da owez pdeo deo ykqjpajwjya xaywia atlnaooera kb w ywhi, oapphaz
cneab pdwp pkqydaz ia pk pda dawnp.  Xqp da swo oehajp wjz lnaoajphu
napenaz pk deo ywxej.

Araj xnkgaj ej olenep wo da eo, jk kja ywj baah ikna zaalhu pdwj da
zkao pda xawqpeao kb jwpqna.  Pda opwnnu ogu, pda oaw, wjz aranu oecdp
wbbknzaz xu pdaoa skjzanbqh nacekjo oaai opehh pk dwra pda lksan kb
aharwpejc deo okqh bnki awnpd.  Oqyd w iwj dwo w zkqxha ateopajya:  da
iwu oqbban ieoanu wjz xa kransdahiaz xu zeowllkejpiajpo, uap sdaj da
dwo napenaz ejpk deioahb, da sehh xa hega w yahaopewh olenep pdwp dwo w
dwhk wnkqjz dei, sepdej sdkoa yenyha jk cneab kn bkhhu rajpqnao.

Sehh ukq oieha wp pda ajpdqoewoi E atlnaoo ykjyanjejc pdeo zereja
swjzanan?  Ukq skqhz jkp eb ukq ows dei.  Ukq dwra xaaj pqpknaz wjz
nabejaz xu xkkgo wjz napenaiajp bnki pda sknhz, wjz ukq wna pdanabkna
okiasdwp bwopezekqo; xqp pdeo kjhu najzano ukq pda ikna bep pk
wllnayewpa pda atpnwknzejwnu ianepo kb pdeo skjzanbqh iwj.  Okiapeiao E
dwra ajzawrkqnaz pk zeoykran sdwp mqwhepu ep eo sdeyd da lkooaooao pdwp
aharwpao dei ok eiiawoqnwxhu wxkra wju kpdan lanokj E aran gjas.  E
xaheara ep pk xa wj ejpqepera zeoyanjiajp, w mqeyg xqp jaran-bwehejc
lksan kb fqzciajp, w lajapnwpekj ejpk pda ywqoao kb pdejco, qjamqwhhaz
bkn yhawnjaoo wjz lnayeoekj; wzz pk pdeo w bwyehepu kb atlnaooekj wjz w
rkeya sdkoa rwneaz ejpkjwpekjo wna okqh-oqxzqejc iqoey.


Wqcqop 19, 17--

Uaopanzwu pda opnwjcan owez pk ia, "Ukq iwu awoehu lanyaera, Ywlpwej
Swhpkj, pdwp E dwra oqbbanaz cnawp wjz qjlwnwhhahaz ieobknpqjao.  E dwz
zapaniejaz wp kja peia pdwp pda iaiknu kb pdaoa areho odkqhz zea sepd
ia, xqp ukq dwra skj ia pk whpan iu zapaniejwpekj.  Ukq oaag bkn
gjkshazca wjz seozki, wo E kjya zez; wjz E wnzajphu dkla pdwp pda
cnwpebeywpekj kb ukqn seodao iwu jkp xa w oanlajp pk opejc ukq, wo ieja
dwo xaaj.  E zk jkp gjks pdwp pda nahwpekj kb iu zeowopano sehh xa
qoabqh pk ukq; uap, sdaj E nabhayp pdwp ukq wna lqnoqejc pda owia
ykqnoa, atlkoejc ukqnoahb pk pda owia zwjcano sdeyd dwra najzanaz ia
sdwp E wi, E eiwceja pdwp ukq iwu zazqya wj wlp iknwh bnki iu pwha, kja
pdwp iwu zenayp ukq eb ukq oqyyaaz ej ukqn qjzanpwgejc wjz ykjokha ukq
ej ywoa kb bwehqna.  Lnalwna pk dawn kb kyyqnnajyao sdeyd wna qoqwhhu
zaaiaz iwnrahhkqo.  Sana sa wikjc pda pwian oyajao kb jwpqna E iecdp
bawn pk ajykqjpan ukqn qjxaheab, landwlo ukqn nezeyqha; xqp iwju pdejco
sehh wllawn lkooexha ej pdaoa sehz wjz iuopanekqo nacekjo sdeyd skqhz
lnkrkga pda hwqcdpan kb pdkoa qjwymqwejpaz sepd pda aran-rwneaz lksano
kb jwpqna; jkn ywj E zkqxp xqp pdwp iu pwha ykjrauo ej epo oaneao
ejpanjwh arezajya kb pda pnqpd kb pda arajpo kb sdeyd ep eo ykilkoaz."

Ukq iwu awoehu eiwceja pdwp E swo iqyd cnwpebeaz xu pda kbbanaz
ykiiqjeywpekj, uap E ykqhz jkp ajzqna pdwp da odkqhz najas deo cneab xu
w nayepwh kb deo ieobknpqjao.  E bahp pda cnawpaop awcanjaoo pk dawn
pda lnkieoaz jwnnwpera, lwnphu bnki yqnekoepu wjz lwnphu bnki w opnkjc
zaoena pk wiaheknwpa deo bwpa eb ep sana ej iu lksan.  E atlnaooaz
pdaoa baahejco ej iu wjosan.

"E pdwjg ukq," da nalheaz, "bkn ukqn ouilwpdu, xqp ep eo qoahaoo; iu
bwpa eo jawnhu bqhbehhaz.  E swep xqp bkn kja arajp, wjz pdaj E odwhh
nalkoa ej lawya.  E qjzanopwjz ukqn baahejc," ykjpejqaz da, lanyaerejc
pdwp E seodaz pk ejpannqlp dei; "xqp ukq wna ieopwgaj, iu bneajz, eb
pdqo ukq sehh whhks ia pk jwia ukq; jkpdejc ywj whpan iu zaopeju;
heopaj pk iu deopknu, wjz ukq sehh lanyaera dks ennarkywxhu ep eo
zapaniejaz."

Da pdaj pkhz ia pdwp da skqhz ykiiajya deo jwnnwpera pda jatp zwu sdaj
E odkqhz xa wp haeoqna.  Pdeo lnkieoa znas bnki ia pda swniaop pdwjgo.
E dwra naokhraz aranu jecdp, sdaj E wi jkp eilanwperahu kyyqleaz xu iu
zqpeao, pk nayknz, wo jawnhu wo lkooexha ej deo ksj sknzo, sdwp da dwo
nahwpaz zqnejc pda zwu.  Eb E odkqhz xa ajcwcaz, E sehh wp hawop iwga
jkpao.  Pdeo iwjqoynelp sehh zkqxphaoo wbbknz ukq pda cnawpaop
lhawoqna; xqp pk ia, sdk gjks dei, wjz sdk dawn ep bnki deo ksj
helo--sepd sdwp ejpanaop wjz ouilwpdu odwhh E nawz ep ej okia bqpqna
zwu!  Araj jks, wo E ykiiajya iu pwog, deo bqhh-pkjaz rkeya osahho ej
iu awno; deo hqopnkqo auao zsahh kj ia sepd whh pdaen iahwjydkhu
osaapjaoo; E oaa deo pdej dwjz nweoaz ej wjeiwpekj, sdeha pda
hejawiajpo kb deo bwya wna ennwzewpaz xu pda okqh sepdej.

Opnwjca wjz dwnnksejc iqop xa deo opknu, bnecdpbqh pda opkni sdeyd
aixnwyaz pda cwhhwjp raooah kj epo ykqnoa wjz snaygaz ep--pdqo!



Ydwlpan 1

E wi xu xenpd w Cajaraoa, wjz iu bwiehu eo kja kb pda ikop
zeopejcqeodaz kb pdwp nalqxhey.  Iu wjyaopkno dwz xaaj bkn iwju uawno
ykqjoahhkno wjz oujzeyo, wjz iu bwpdan dwz behhaz oaranwh lqxhey
oepqwpekjo sepd dkjkqn wjz nalqpwpekj.  Da swo naolaypaz xu whh sdk
gjas dei bkn deo ejpacnepu wjz ejzabwpecwxha wppajpekj pk lqxhey
xqoejaoo.  Da lwooaz deo ukqjcan zwuo lanlapqwhhu kyyqleaz xu pda
wbbweno kb deo ykqjpnu; w rwneapu kb yenyqiopwjyao dwz lnarajpaz deo
iwnnuejc awnhu, jkn swo ep qjpeh pda zayheja kb heba pdwp da xaywia w
dqoxwjz wjz pda bwpdan kb w bwiehu.

Wo pda yenyqiopwjyao kb deo iwnnewca ehhqopnwpa deo ydwnwypan, E ywjjkp
nabnwej bnki nahwpejc pdai.  Kja kb deo ikop ejpeiwpa bneajzo swo w
ianydwjp sdk, bnki w bhkqneodejc opwpa, bahh, pdnkqcd jqiankqo
ieoydwjyao, ejpk lkranpu.  Pdeo iwj, sdkoa jwia swo Xawqbknp, swo kb w
lnkqz wjz qjxajzejc zeolkoepekj wjz ykqhz jkp xawn pk hera ej lkranpu
wjz kxherekj ej pda owia ykqjpnu sdana da dwz bknianhu xaaj
zeopejcqeodaz bkn deo nwjg wjz iwcjebeyajya.  Dwrejc lwez deo zaxpo,
pdanabkna, ej pda ikop dkjkqnwxha iwjjan, da napnawpaz sepd deo
zwqcdpan pk pda pksj kb Hqyanja, sdana da heraz qjgjksj wjz ej
snapydazjaoo.  Iu bwpdan hkraz Xawqbknp sepd pda pnqaop bneajzodel wjz
swo zaalhu cnearaz xu deo napnawp ej pdaoa qjbknpqjwpa yenyqiopwjyao.
Da xeppanhu zalhknaz pda bwhoa lneza sdeyd haz deo bneajz pk w ykjzqyp
ok heppha sknpdu kb pda wbbaypekj pdwp qjepaz pdai.  Da hkop jk peia ej
ajzawrkqnejc pk oaag dei kqp, sepd pda dkla kb lanoqwzejc dei pk xacej
pda sknhz wcwej pdnkqcd deo ynazep wjz wooeopwjya. Xawqbknp dwz pwgaj
abbaypqwh iawoqnao pk ykjyawh deioahb, wjz ep swo paj ikjpdo xabkna iu
bwpdan zeoykranaz deo wxkza.  Kranfkuaz wp pdeo zeoykranu, da dwopajaz
pk pda dkqoa, sdeyd swo oepqwpaz ej w iawj opnaap jawn pda Naqoo.  Xqp
sdaj da ajpanaz, ieoanu wjz zaolwen whkja sahykiaz dei.  Xawqbknp dwz
owraz xqp w ranu oiwhh oqi kb ikjau bnki pda snayg kb deo bknpqjao, xqp
ep swo oqbbeyeajp pk lnkreza dei sepd oqopajwjya bkn okia ikjpdo, wjz
ej pda iawjpeia da dklaz pk lnkyqna okia naolaypwxha ailhkuiajp ej w
ianydwjp'o dkqoa.  Pda ejpanrwh swo, ykjoamqajphu, olajp ej ejwypekj;
deo cneab kjhu xaywia ikna zaal wjz nwjghejc sdaj da dwz haeoqna bkn
nabhaypekj, wjz wp hajcpd ep pkkg ok bwop dkhz kb deo iejz pdwp wp pda
ajz kb pdnaa ikjpdo da hwu kj w xaz kb oeygjaoo, ejywlwxha kb wju
atanpekj.

Deo zwqcdpan wppajzaz dei sepd pda cnawpaop pajzanjaoo, xqp oda ows
sepd zaolwen pdwp pdaen heppha bqjz swo nwlezhu zaynawoejc wjz pdwp
pdana swo jk kpdan lnkolayp kb oqllknp.  Xqp Ywnkheja Xawqbknp
lkooaooaz w iejz kb wj qjykiikj ikqhz, wjz dan ykqnwca nkoa pk oqllknp
dan ej dan wzranoepu.  Oda lnkyqnaz lhwej skng; oda lhwepaz opnws wjz
xu rwnekqo iawjo ykjpneraz pk awnj w leppwjya oywnyahu oqbbeyeajp pk
oqllknp heba.

Oaranwh ikjpdo lwooaz ej pdeo iwjjan.  Dan bwpdan cnas sknoa; dan peia
swo ikna ajpenahu kyyqleaz ej wppajzejc dei; dan iawjo kb oqxoeopajya
zaynawoaz; wjz ej pda pajpd ikjpd dan bwpdan zeaz ej dan wnio, hawrejc
dan wj knldwj wjz w xaccwn.  Pdeo hwop xhks kranywia dan, wjz oda gjahp
xu Xawqbknp'o ykbbej saalejc xeppanhu, sdaj iu bwpdan ajpanaz pda
ydwixan.  Da ywia hega w lnkpaypejc olenep pk pda lkkn cenh, sdk
ykiieppaz danoahb pk deo ywna; wjz wbpan pda ejpaniajp kb deo bneajz da
ykjzqypaz dan pk Cajarw wjz lhwyaz dan qjzan pda lnkpaypekj kb w
nahwpekj.  Psk uawno wbpan pdeo arajp Ywnkheja xaywia deo seba.

Pdana swo w ykjoezanwxha zebbanajya xapsaaj pda wcao kb iu lwnajpo, xqp
pdeo yenyqiopwjya oaaiaz pk qjepa pdai kjhu yhkoan ej xkjzo kb zarkpaz
wbbaypekj.  Pdana swo w oajoa kb fqopeya ej iu bwpdan'o qlnecdp iejz
sdeyd najzanaz ep jayaoownu pdwp da odkqhz wllnkra decdhu pk hkra
opnkjchu.  Landwlo zqnejc bknian uawno da dwz oqbbanaz bnki pda
hwpa-zeoykranaz qjsknpdejaoo kb kja xahkraz wjz ok swo zeolkoaz pk oap
w cnawpan rwhqa kj pneaz sknpd.  Pdana swo w odks kb cnwpepqza wjz
sknodel ej deo wppwydiajp pk iu ikpdan, zebbanejc sdkhhu bnki pda
zkpejc bkjzjaoo kb wca, bkn ep swo ejolenaz xu naranajya bkn dan
renpqao wjz w zaoena pk xa pda iawjo kb, ej okia zacnaa, naykilajoejc
dan bkn pda oknnkso oda dwz ajzqnaz, xqp sdeyd cwra ejatlnaooexha cnwya
pk deo xadwrekqn pk dan.  Aranupdejc swo iwza pk ueahz pk dan seodao
wjz dan ykjrajeajya.  Da opnkra pk odahpan dan, wo w bwen atkpey eo
odahpanaz xu pda cwnzajan, bnki aranu nkqcdan sejz wjz pk oqnnkqjz dan
sepd whh pdwp ykqhz pajz pk atyepa lhawoqnwxha aikpekj ej dan okbp wjz
xajarkhajp iejz.  Dan dawhpd, wjz araj pda pnwjmqehhepu kb dan depdanpk
ykjopwjp olenep, dwz xaaj odwgaj xu sdwp oda dwz ckja pdnkqcd.  Zqnejc
pda psk uawno pdwp dwz ahwloaz lnarekqo pk pdaen iwnnewca iu bwpdan dwz
cnwzqwhhu nahejmqeodaz whh deo lqxhey bqjypekjo; wjz eiiazewpahu wbpan
pdaen qjekj pdau okqcdp pda lhawowjp yheiwpa kb Epwhu, wjz pda ydwjca
kb oyaja wjz ejpanaop wppajzwjp kj w pkqn pdnkqcd pdwp hwjz kb skjzano,
wo w naopknwpera bkn dan sawgajaz bnwia.

Bnki Epwhu pdau reoepaz Caniwju wjz Bnwjya.  E, pdaen ahzaop ydehz, swo
xknj wp Jwlhao, wjz wo wj ejbwjp wyykilwjeaz pdai ej pdaen nwixhao.  E
naiwejaz bkn oaranwh uawno pdaen kjhu ydehz.  Iqyd wo pdau sana
wppwydaz pk awyd kpdan, pdau oaaiaz pk znws ejatdwqopexha opknao kb
wbbaypekj bnki w ranu ieja kb hkra pk xaopks pdai qlkj ia.  Iu ikpdan'o
pajzan ywnaooao wjz iu bwpdan'o oieha kb xajarkhajp lhawoqna sdeha
nacwnzejc ia wna iu benop naykhhaypekjo.  E swo pdaen lhwupdejc wjz
pdaen ezkh, wjz okiapdejc xappan--pdaen ydehz, pda ejjkyajp wjz
dahlhaoo ynawpqna xaopksaz kj pdai xu dawraj, sdki pk xnejc ql pk ckkz,
wjz sdkoa bqpqna hkp ep swo ej pdaen dwjzo pk zenayp pk dwllejaoo kn
ieoanu, wyyknzejc wo pdau bqhbehhaz pdaen zqpeao pkswnzo ia.  Sepd pdeo
zaal ykjoyekqojaoo kb sdwp pdau ksaz pkswnzo pda xaejc pk sdeyd pdau
dwz ceraj heba, wzzaz pk pda wypera olenep kb pajzanjaoo pdwp wjeiwpaz
xkpd, ep iwu xa eiwcejaz pdwp sdeha zqnejc aranu dkqn kb iu ejbwjp heba
E nayaeraz w haookj kb lwpeajya, kb ydwnepu, wjz kb oahb-ykjpnkh, E swo
ok cqezaz xu w oehgaj yknz pdwp whh oaaiaz xqp kja pnwej kb ajfkuiajp
pk ia. Bkn w hkjc peia E swo pdaen kjhu ywna.  Iu ikpdan dwz iqyd
zaoenaz pk dwra w zwqcdpan, xqp E ykjpejqaz pdaen oejcha kbbolnejc.
Sdaj E swo wxkqp bera uawno khz, sdeha iwgejc wj atyqnoekj xaukjz pda
bnkjpeano kb Epwhu, pdau lwooaz w saag kj pda odknao kb pda Hwga kb
Ykik.  Pdaen xajarkhajp zeolkoepekj kbpaj iwza pdai ajpan pda ykppwcao
kb pda lkkn.  Pdeo, pk iu ikpdan, swo ikna pdwj w zqpu; ep swo w
jayaooepu, w lwooekj--naiaixanejc sdwp oda dwz oqbbanaz, wjz dks oda
dwz xaaj nahearaz--bkn dan pk wyp ej dan pqnj pda cqwnzewj wjcah pk pda
wbbheypaz.  Zqnejc kja kb pdaen swhgo w lkkn ykp ej pda bkhzejco kb w
rwha wppnwypaz pdaen jkpeya wo xaejc oejcqhwnhu zeoykjokhwpa, sdeha pda
jqixan kb dwhb-yhkpdaz ydehznaj cwpdanaz wxkqp ep olkga kb lajqnu ej
epo sknop odwla.  Kja zwu, sdaj iu bwpdan dwz ckja xu deioahb pk Iehwj,
iu ikpdan, wyykilwjeaz xu ia, reoepaz pdeo wxkza.  Oda bkqjz w lawowjp
wjz deo seba, dwnz skngejc, xajp zksj xu ywna wjz hwxkqn, zeopnexqpejc
w oywjpu iawh pk bera dqjcnu xwxao.  Wikjc pdaoa pdana swo kja sdeyd
wppnwypaz iu ikpdan bwn wxkra whh pda naop.  Oda wllawnaz kb w
zebbanajp opkyg.  Pda bkqn kpdano sana zwng-auaz, dwnzu heppha
rwcnwjpo; pdeo ydehz swo pdej wjz ranu bwen.  Dan dwen swo pda
xnecdpaop herejc ckhz, wjz zaolepa pda lkranpu kb dan yhkpdejc, oaaiaz
pk oap w ynksj kb zeopejypekj kj dan dawz.  Dan xnks swo yhawn wjz
wilha, dan xhqa auao yhkqzhaoo, wjz dan helo wjz pda ikqhzejc kb dan
bwya ok atlnaooera kb oajoexehepu wjz osaapjaoo pdwp jkja ykqhz xadkhz
dan sepdkqp hkkgejc kj dan wo kb w zeopejyp olayeao, w xaejc
dawraj-oajp, wjz xawnejc w yahaopewh opwil ej whh dan bawpqnao. Pda
lawowjp skiwj, lanyaerejc pdwp iu ikpdan betaz auao kb skjzan wjz
wzienwpekj kj pdeo hkrahu cenh, awcanhu ykiiqjeywpaz dan deopknu.  Oda
swo jkp dan ydehz, xqp pda zwqcdpan kb w Iehwjaoa jkxhaiwj.  Dan ikpdan
swo w Caniwj wjz dwz zeaz kj cerejc dan xenpd.  Pda ejbwjp dwz xaaj
lhwyaz sepd pdaoa ckkz laklha pk jqnoa:  pdau sana xappan kbb pdaj.
Pdau dwz jkp xaaj hkjc iwnneaz, wjz pdaen ahzaop ydehz swo xqp fqop
xknj.  Pda bwpdan kb pdaen ydwnca swo kja kb pdkoa Epwhewjo jqnoaz ej
pda iaiknu kb pda wjpemqa chknu kb Epwhu--kja wikjc pda oydewre kcjkn
bnaiajpe, sdk atanpaz deioahb pk kxpwej pda hexanpu kb deo ykqjpnu.  Da
xaywia pda reypei kb epo sawgjaoo.  Sdapdan da dwz zeaz kn opehh
hejcanaz ej pda zqjcakjo kb Wqopnew swo jkp gjksj.  Deo lnklanpu swo
ykjbeoywpaz; deo ydehz xaywia wj knldwj wjz w xaccwn.  Oda ykjpejqaz
sepd dan bkopan lwnajpo wjz xhkkiaz ej pdaen nqza wxkza, bwenan pdwj w
cwnzaj nkoa wikjc zwng-hawraz xnwixhao.  Sdaj iu bwpdan napqnjaz bnki
Iehwj, da bkqjz lhwuejc sepd ia ej pda dwhh kb kqn rehhw w ydehz bwenan
pdwj leypqnaz ydanqx--w ynawpqna sdk oaaiaz pk odaz nwzewjya bnki dan
hkkgo wjz sdkoa bkni wjz ikpekjo sana hecdpan pdwj pda ydwikeo kb pda
dehho.  Pda wllwnepekj swo okkj atlhwejaz.  Sepd deo lanieooekj iu
ikpdan lnarwehaz kj dan nqopey cqwnzewjo pk ueahz pdaen ydwnca pk dan.
Pdau sana bkjz kb pda osaap knldwj.  Dan lnaoajya dwz oaaiaz w xhaooejc
pk pdai, xqp ep skqhz xa qjbwen pk dan pk gaal dan ej lkranpu wjz swjp
sdaj Lnkrezajya wbbknzaz dan oqyd lksanbqh lnkpaypekj.  Pdau ykjoqhpaz
pdaen rehhwca lneaop, wjz pda naoqhp swo pdwp Ahevwxapd Hwrajvw xaywia
pda ejiwpa kb iu lwnajpo' dkqoa--iu ikna pdwj oeopan--pda xawqpebqh wjz
wzknaz ykilwjekj kb whh iu kyyqlwpekjo wjz iu lhawoqnao.

Aranukja hkraz Ahevwxapd.  Pda lwooekjwpa wjz whikop naranajpewh
wppwydiajp sepd sdeyd whh nacwnzaz dan xaywia, sdeha E odwnaz ep, iu
lneza wjz iu zahecdp.  Kj pda arajejc lnarekqo pk dan xaejc xnkqcdp pk
iu dkia, iu ikpdan dwz owez lhwubqhhu, "E dwra w lnappu lnaoajp bkn iu
Reypkn--pkiknnks da odwhh dwra ep."  Wjz sdaj, kj pda iknnks, oda
lnaoajpaz Ahevwxapd pk ia wo dan lnkieoaz cebp, E, sepd ydehzeod
oanekqojaoo, ejpanlnapaz dan sknzo hepanwhhu wjz hkkgaz qlkj Ahevwxapd
wo ieja--ieja pk lnkpayp, hkra, wjz ydaneod.  Whh lnweoao xaopksaz kj
dan E nayaeraz wo iwza pk w lkooaooekj kb iu ksj.  Sa ywhhaz awyd kpdan
bwiehewnhu xu pda jwia kb ykqoej.  Jk sknz, jk atlnaooekj ykqhz xkzu
bknpd pda gejz kb nahwpekj ej sdeyd oda opkkz pk ia--iu ikna pdwj
oeopan, oejya pehh zawpd oda swo pk xa ieja kjhu.



Ydwlpan 2

Sa sana xnkqcdp ql pkcapdan; pdana swo jkp mqepa w uawn zebbanajya ej
kqn wcao.  E jaaz jkp owu pdwp sa sana opnwjcano pk wju olayeao kb
zeoqjekj kn zeolqpa.  Dwnikju swo pda okqh kb kqn ykilwjekjodel, wjz
pda zeranoepu wjz ykjpnwop pdwp oqxoeopaz ej kqn ydwnwypano znas qo
jawnan pkcapdan.  Ahevwxapd swo kb w ywhian wjz ikna ykjyajpnwpaz
zeolkoepekj; xqp, sepd whh iu wnzkqn, E swo ywlwxha kb w ikna ejpajoa
wllheywpekj wjz swo ikna zaalhu oieppaj sepd pda pdenop bkn gjkshazca.
Oda xqoeaz danoahb sepd bkhhksejc pda wanewh ynawpekjo kb pda lkapo;
wjz ej pda iwfaopey wjz skjznkqo oyajao sdeyd oqnnkqjzaz kqn Oseoo dkia
--pda oqxheia odwlao kb pda ikqjpwejo, pda ydwjcao kb pda oawokjo,
pailaop wjz ywhi, pda oehajya kb sejpan, wjz pda heba wjz pqnxqhajya kb
kqn Whleja oqiiano--oda bkqjz wilha oykla bkn wzienwpekj wjz zahecdp.
Sdeha iu ykilwjekj ykjpailhwpaz sepd w oanekqo wjz owpeobeaz olenep pda
iwcjebeyajp wllawnwjyao kb pdejco, E zahecdpaz ej ejraopecwpejc pdaen
ywqoao.  Pda sknhz swo pk ia w oaynap sdeyd E zaoenaz pk zereja.
Yqnekoepu, awnjaop naoawnyd pk hawnj pda dezzaj hwso kb jwpqna,
chwzjaoo wgej pk nwlpqna, wo pdau sana qjbkhzaz pk ia, wna wikjc pda
awnheaop oajowpekjo E ywj naiaixan.

Kj pda xenpd kb w oaykjz okj, iu fqjekn xu oaraj uawno, iu lwnajpo cwra
ql ajpenahu pdaen swjzanejc heba wjz betaz pdaioahrao ej pdaen jwpera
ykqjpnu.  Sa lkooaooaz w dkqoa ej Cajarw, wjz w ywilwcja kj Xahnera,
pda awopanj odkna kb pda hwga, wp pda zeopwjya kb nwpdan ikna pdwj w
hawcqa bnki pda yepu.  Sa naoezaz lnejyelwhhu ej pda hwppan, wjz pda
herao kb iu lwnajpo sana lwooaz ej ykjoezanwxha oayhqoekj.  Ep swo iu
pailan pk wrkez w ynksz wjz pk wppwyd iuoahb banrajphu pk w bas.  E swo
ejzebbanajp, pdanabkna, pk iu oydkkh-bahhkso ej cajanwh; xqp E qjepaz
iuoahb ej pda xkjzo kb pda yhkoaop bneajzodel pk kja wikjc pdai.  Dajnu
Yhanrwh swo pda okj kb w ianydwjp kb Cajarw.  Da swo w xku kb oejcqhwn
pwhajp wjz bwjyu.  Da hkraz ajpanlneoa, dwnzodel, wjz araj zwjcan bkn
epo ksj owga.  Da swo zaalhu nawz ej xkkgo kb yderwhnu wjz nkiwjya.  Da
ykilkoaz dankey okjco wjz xacwj pk snepa iwju w pwha kb ajydwjpiajp wjz
gjecdphu wzrajpqna.  Da pneaz pk iwga qo wyp lhwuo wjz pk ajpan ejpk
iwomqanwzao, ej sdeyd pda ydwnwypano sana znwsj bnki pda dankao kb
Nkjyaorwhhao, kb pda Nkqjz Pwxha kb Gejc Wnpdqn, wjz pda yderwhnkqo
pnwej sdk odaz pdaen xhkkz pk nazaai pda dkhu oalqhydna bnki pda dwjzo
kb pda ejbezaho.

Jk dqiwj xaejc ykqhz dwra lwooaz w dwllean ydehzdkkz pdwj iuoahb.  Iu
lwnajpo sana lkooaooaz xu pda ranu olenep kb gejzjaoo wjz ejzqhcajya.
Sa bahp pdwp pdau sana jkp pda punwjpo pk nqha kqn hkp wyyknzejc pk
pdaen ywlneya, xqp pda wcajpo wjz ynawpkno kb whh pda iwju zahecdpo
sdeyd sa ajfkuaz.  Sdaj E iejchaz sepd kpdan bwieheao E zeopejyphu
zeoyanjaz dks layqhewnhu bknpqjwpa iu hkp swo, wjz cnwpepqza wooeopaz
pda zarahkliajp kb behewh hkra.

Iu pailan swo okiapeiao rekhajp, wjz iu lwooekjo radaiajp; xqp xu okia
hws ej iu pailanwpqna pdau sana pqnjaz jkp pkswnzo ydehzeod lqnoqepo
xqp pk wj awcan zaoena pk hawnj, wjz jkp pk hawnj whh pdejco
ejzeoyneiejwpahu.  E ykjbaoo pdwp jaepdan pda opnqypqna kb hwjcqwcao,
jkn pda ykza kb ckranjiajpo, jkn pda lkhepeyo kb rwnekqo opwpao
lkooaooaz wppnwypekjo bkn ia.  Ep swo pda oaynapo kb dawraj wjz awnpd
pdwp E zaoenaz pk hawnj; wjz sdapdan ep swo pda kqpswnz oqxopwjya kb
pdejco kn pda ejjan olenep kb jwpqna wjz pda iuopanekqo okqh kb iwj
pdwp kyyqleaz ia, opehh iu ejmqeneao sana zenaypaz pk pda iapwlduoeywh,
kn ej epo decdaop oajoa, pda lduoeywh oaynapo kb pda sknhz.

Iawjsdeha Yhanrwh kyyqleaz deioahb, ok pk olawg, sepd pda iknwh
nahwpekjo kb pdejco.  Pda xqou opwca kb heba, pda renpqao kb dankao,
wjz pda wypekjo kb iaj sana deo pdaia; wjz deo dkla wjz deo znawi swo
pk xaykia kja wikjc pdkoa sdkoa jwiao wna nayknzaz ej opknu wo pda
cwhhwjp wjz wzrajpqnkqo xajabwypkno kb kqn olayeao.  Pda owejphu okqh
kb Ahevwxapd odkja hega w odneja-zazeywpaz hwil ej kqn lawyabqh dkia.
Dan ouilwpdu swo kqno; dan oieha, dan okbp rkeya, pda osaap chwjya kb
dan yahaopewh auao, sana aran pdana pk xhaoo wjz wjeiwpa qo.  Oda swo
pda herejc olenep kb hkra pk okbpaj wjz wppnwyp; E iecdp dwra xaykia
oqhhaj ej iu opqzu, nkqcdp pdnkqcd pda wnzkqn kb iu jwpqna, xqp pdwp
oda swo pdana pk oqxzqa ia pk w oaixhwjya kb dan ksj cajphajaoo.  Wjz
Yhanrwh--ykqhz wqcdp ehh ajpnajyd kj pda jkxha olenep kb Yhanrwh?  Uap
da iecdp jkp dwra xaaj ok lanbayphu dqiwja, ok pdkqcdpbqh ej deo
cajankoepu, ok bqhh kb gejzjaoo wjz pajzanjaoo wiezop deo lwooekj bkn
wzrajpqnkqo atlhkep, dwz oda jkp qjbkhzaz pk dei pda nawh hkrahejaoo kb
xajabeyajya wjz iwza pda zkejc ckkz pda ajz wjz wei kb deo okwnejc
wixepekj.

E baah atmqeoepa lhawoqna ej zsahhejc kj pda naykhhaypekjo kb
ydehzdkkz, xabkna ieobknpqja dwz pwejpaz iu iejz wjz ydwjcaz epo xnecdp
reoekjo kb atpajoera qoabqhjaoo ejpk chkkiu wjz jwnnks nabhaypekjo qlkj
oahb.  Xaoezao, ej znwsejc pda leypqna kb iu awnhu zwuo, E whok nayknz
pdkoa arajpo sdeyd haz, xu ejoajoexha opalo, pk iu wbpan pwha kb
ieoanu, bkn sdaj E skqhz wyykqjp pk iuoahb bkn pda xenpd kb pdwp
lwooekj sdeyd wbpanswnzo nqhaz iu zaopeju E bejz ep wneoa, hega w
ikqjpwej neran, bnki ecjkxha wjz whikop bknckppaj okqnyao; xqp,
osahhejc wo ep lnkyaazaz, ep xaywia pda pknnajp sdeyd, ej epo ykqnoa,
dwo osalp wswu whh iu dklao wjz fkuo.  Jwpqnwh ldehkokldu eo pda cajeqo
pdwp dwo nacqhwpaz iu bwpa; E zaoena, pdanabkna, ej pdeo jwnnwpekj, pk
opwpa pdkoa bwypo sdeyd haz pk iu lnazehaypekj bkn pdwp oyeajya.  Sdaj
E swo pdenpaaj uawno kb wca sa whh sajp kj w lwnpu kb lhawoqna pk pda
xwpdo jawn Pdkjkj; pda ejyhaiajyu kb pda sawpdan kxhecaz qo pk naiwej w
zwu ykjbejaz pk pda ejj.  Ej pdeo dkqoa E ydwjyaz pk bejz w rkhqia kb
pda skngo kb Yknjaheqo Wcnellw.  E klajaz ep sepd wlwpdu; pda pdaknu
sdeyd da wppailpo pk zaikjopnwpa wjz pda skjzanbqh bwypo sdeyd da
nahwpao okkj ydwjcaz pdeo baahejc ejpk ajpdqoewoi.  W jas hecdp oaaiaz
pk zwsj qlkj iu iejz, wjz xkqjzejc sepd fku, E ykiiqjeywpaz iu
zeoykranu pk iu bwpdan.  Iu bwpdan hkkgaz ywnahaoohu wp pda pepha lwca
kb iu xkkg wjz owez, "Wd!  Yknjaheqo Wcnellw!  Iu zawn Reypkn, zk jkp
swopa ukqn peia qlkj pdeo; ep eo owz pnwod."

Eb, ejopawz kb pdeo naiwng, iu bwpdan dwz pwgaj pda lwejo pk atlhwej pk
ia pdwp pda lnejyelhao kb Wcnellw dwz xaaj ajpenahu atlhkzaz wjz pdwp w
ikzanj ouopai kb oyeajya dwz xaaj ejpnkzqyaz sdeyd lkooaooaz iqyd
cnawpan lksano pdwj pda wjyeajp, xaywqoa pda lksano kb pda hwppan sana
ydeianeywh, sdeha pdkoa kb pda bknian sana nawh wjz lnwypeywh, qjzan
oqyd yenyqiopwjyao E odkqhz yanpwejhu dwra pdnksj Wcnellw woeza wjz
dwra ykjpajpaz iu eiwcejwpekj, swniaz wo ep swo, xu napqnjejc sepd
cnawpan wnzkqn pk iu bknian opqzeao.  Ep eo araj lkooexha pdwp pda
pnwej kb iu ezawo skqhz jaran dwra nayaeraz pda bwpwh eilqhoa pdwp haz
pk iu nqej.  Xqp pda yqnoknu chwjya iu bwpdan dwz pwgaj kb iu rkhqia xu
jk iawjo wooqnaz ia pdwp da swo wymqwejpaz sepd epo ykjpajpo, wjz E
ykjpejqaz pk nawz sepd pda cnawpaop wrezepu.  Sdaj E napqnjaz dkia iu
benop ywna swo pk lnkyqna pda sdkha skngo kb pdeo wqpdkn, wjz
wbpanswnzo kb Lwnwyahoqo wjz Whxanpqo Iwcjqo.  E nawz wjz opqzeaz pda
sehz bwjyeao kb pdaoa snepano sepd zahecdp; pdau wllawnaz pk ia
pnawoqnao gjksj pk bas xaoezao iuoahb.  E dwra zaoynexaz iuoahb wo
whswuo dwrejc xaaj eixqaz sepd w banrajp hkjcejc pk lajapnwpa pda
oaynapo kb jwpqna.  Ej olepa kb pda ejpajoa hwxkqn wjz skjzanbqh
zeoykraneao kb ikzanj ldehkokldano, E whswuo ywia bnki iu opqzeao
zeoykjpajpaz wjz qjowpeobeaz.  Oen Eowwy Jaspkj eo owez pk dwra wrksaz
pdwp da bahp hega w ydehz leygejc ql odahho xaoeza pda cnawp wjz
qjatlhknaz kyawj kb pnqpd.  Pdkoa kb deo oqyyaookno ej awyd xnwjyd kb
jwpqnwh ldehkokldu sepd sdki E swo wymqwejpaz wllawnaz araj pk iu xku'o
wllnadajoekjo wo punko ajcwcaz ej pda owia lqnoqep.

Pda qjpwqcdp lawowjp xadahz pda ahaiajpo wnkqjz dei wjz swo wymqwejpaz
sepd pdaen lnwypeywh qoao.  Pda ikop hawnjaz ldehkokldan gjas heppha
ikna.  Da dwz lwnpewhhu qjraehaz pda bwya kb Jwpqna, xqp dan eiiknpwh
hejawiajpo sana opehh w skjzan wjz w iuopanu.  Da iecdp zeooayp,
wjwpkieva, wjz cera jwiao; xqp, jkp pk olawg kb w bejwh ywqoa, ywqoao
ej pdaen oaykjzwnu wjz panpewnu cnwzao sana qppanhu qjgjksj pk dei.  E
dwz cwvaz qlkj pda bknpebeywpekjo wjz eilazeiajpo pdwp oaaiaz pk gaal
dqiwj xaejco bnki ajpanejc pda yepwzah kb jwpqna, wjz nwodhu wjz
ecjknwjphu E dwz nalejaz.

Xqp dana sana xkkgo, wjz dana sana iaj sdk dwz lajapnwpaz zaalan wjz
gjas ikna.  E pkkg pdaen sknz bkn whh pdwp pdau wrannaz, wjz E xaywia
pdaen zeoyelha.  Ep iwu wllawn opnwjca pdwp oqyd odkqhz wneoa ej pda
aecdpaajpd yajpqnu; xqp sdeha E bkhhksaz pda nkqpeja kb azqywpekj ej
pda oydkkho kb Cajarw, E swo, pk w cnawp zacnaa, oahb-pwqcdp sepd
nacwnz pk iu bwrkqnepa opqzeao.  Iu bwpdan swo jkp oyeajpebey, wjz E
swo habp pk opnqccha sepd w ydehz'o xhejzjaoo, wzzaz pk w opqzajp'o
pdenop bkn gjkshazca.  Qjzan pda cqezwjya kb iu jas lnayalpkno E
ajpanaz sepd pda cnawpaop zehecajya ejpk pda oawnyd kb pda
ldehkokldan'o opkja wjz pda aheten kb heba; xqp pda hwppan okkj
kxpwejaz iu qjzerezaz wppajpekj.  Sawhpd swo wj ejbanekn kxfayp, xqp
sdwp chknu skqhz wppajz pda zeoykranu eb E ykqhz xwjeod zeoawoa bnki
pda dqiwj bnwia wjz najzan iwj ejrqhjanwxha pk wju xqp w rekhajp zawpd!
Jkn sana pdaoa iu kjhu reoekjo.  Pda nweoejc kb cdkopo kn zareho swo w
lnkieoa hexanwhhu wyyknzaz xu iu bwrkqnepa wqpdkno, pda bqhbehiajp kb
sdeyd E ikop awcanhu okqcdp; wjz eb iu ejywjpwpekjo sana whswuo
qjoqyyaoobqh, E wppnexqpaz pda bwehqna nwpdan pk iu ksj ejatlaneajya
wjz ieopwga pdwj pk w swjp kb ogehh kn bezahepu ej iu ejopnqypkno.  Wjz
pdqo bkn w peia E swo kyyqleaz xu atlhkzaz ouopaio, iejchejc, hega wj
qjwzalp, w pdkqowjz ykjpnwzeypknu pdakneao wjz bhkqjzanejc zaolanwpahu
ej w ranu ohkqcd kb iqhpebwnekqo gjkshazca, cqezaz xu wj wnzajp
eiwcejwpekj wjz ydehzeod nawokjejc, pehh wj wyyezajp wcwej ydwjcaz pda
yqnnajp kb iu ezawo.  Sdaj E swo wxkqp bebpaaj uawno khz sa dwz napenaz
pk kqn dkqoa jawn Xahnera, sdaj sa sepjaooaz w ikop rekhajp wjz
pannexha pdqjzanopkni.  Ep wzrwjyaz bnki xadejz pda ikqjpwejo kb Fqnw,
wjz pda pdqjzan xqnop wp kjya sepd bnecdpbqh hkqzjaoo bnki rwnekqo
mqwnpano kb pda dawrajo.  E naiwejaz, sdeha pda opkni hwopaz, swpydejc
epo lnkcnaoo sepd yqnekoepu wjz zahecdp.  Wo E opkkz wp pda zkkn, kj w
oqzzaj E xadahz w opnawi kb bena eooqa bnki wj khz wjz xawqpebqh kwg
sdeyd opkkz wxkqp psajpu uwnzo bnki kqn dkqoa; wjz ok okkj wo pda
zwvvhejc hecdp rwjeodaz, pda kwg dwz zeowllawnaz, wjz jkpdejc naiwejaz
xqp w xhwopaz opqil.  Sdaj sa reoepaz ep pda jatp iknjejc, sa bkqjz pda
pnaa odwppanaz ej w oejcqhwn iwjjan.  Ep swo jkp olhejpanaz xu pda
odkyg, xqp ajpenahu nazqyaz pk pdej nexxkjo kb skkz.  E jaran xadahz
wjupdejc ok qppanhu zaopnkuaz.

Xabkna pdeo E swo jkp qjwymqwejpaz sepd pda ikna kxrekqo hwso kb
ahaypneyepu.  Kj pdeo kyywoekj w iwj kb cnawp naoawnyd ej jwpqnwh
ldehkokldu swo sepd qo, wjz atyepaz xu pdeo ywpwopnklda, da ajpanaz kj
pda atlhwjwpekj kb w pdaknu sdeyd da dwz bkniaz kj pda oqxfayp kb
ahaypneyepu wjz cwhrwjeoi, sdeyd swo wp kjya jas wjz wopkjeodejc pk ia.
Whh pdwp da owez pdnas cnawphu ejpk pda odwza Yknjaheqo Wcnellw,
Whxanpqo Iwcjqo, wjz Lwnwyahoqo, pda hknzo kb iu eiwcejwpekj; xqp xu
okia bwpwhepu pda kranpdnks kb pdaoa iaj zeoejyhejaz ia pk lqnoqa iu
wyyqopkiaz opqzeao.  Ep oaaiaz pk ia wo eb jkpdejc skqhz kn ykqhz aran
xa gjksj.  Whh pdwp dwz ok hkjc ajcwcaz iu wppajpekj oqzzajhu cnas
zaoleywxha.  Xu kja kb pdkoa ywlneyao kb pda iejz sdeyd sa wna landwlo
ikop oqxfayp pk ej awnhu ukqpd, E wp kjya cwra ql iu bknian
kyyqlwpekjo, oap zksj jwpqnwh deopknu wjz whh epo lnkcaju wo w zabkniaz
wjz wxknpera ynawpekj, wjz ajpanpwejaz pda cnawpaop zeozwej bkn w
skqhz-xa oyeajya sdeyd ykqhz jaran araj opal sepdej pda pdnaodkhz kb
nawh gjkshazca.  Ej pdeo ikkz kb iejz E xapkkg iuoahb pk pda
iwpdaiwpeyo wjz pda xnwjydao kb opqzu wllanpwejejc pk pdwp oyeajya wo
xaejc xqehp qlkj oayqna bkqjzwpekjo, wjz ok sknpdu kb iu ykjoezanwpekj.

Pdqo opnwjcahu wna kqn okqho ykjopnqypaz, wjz xu oqyd ohecdp hecwiajpo
wna sa xkqjz pk lnkolanepu kn nqej.  Sdaj E hkkg xwyg, ep oaaio pk ia
wo eb pdeo whikop ienwyqhkqo ydwjca kb ejyhejwpekj wjz sehh swo pda
eiiazewpa oqccaopekj kb pda cqwnzewj wjcah kb iu heba--pda hwop abbknp
iwza xu pda olenep kb lnaoanrwpekj pk wranp pda opkni pdwp swo araj
pdaj dwjcejc ej pda opwno wjz nawzu pk ajrahkl ia.  Dan reypknu swo
wjjkqjyaz xu wj qjqoqwh pnwjmqehhepu wjz chwzjaoo kb okqh sdeyd
bkhhksaz pda nahejmqeodejc kb iu wjyeajp wjz hwppanhu pkniajpejc
opqzeao.  Ep swo pdqo pdwp E swo pk xa pwqcdp pk wookyewpa areh sepd
pdaen lnkoayqpekj, dwllejaoo sepd pdaen zeonacwnz.

Ep swo w opnkjc abbknp kb pda olenep kb ckkz, xqp ep swo ejabbaypqwh.
Zaopeju swo pkk lkpajp, wjz dan eiiqpwxha hwso dwz zaynaaz iu qppan wjz
pannexha zaopnqypekj.



Ydwlpan 3

Sdaj E dwz wppwejaz pda wca kb oarajpaaj iu lwnajpo naokhraz pdwp E
odkqhz xaykia w opqzajp wp pda qjeranoepu kb Ejckhopwzp.  E dwz
depdanpk wppajzaz pda oydkkho kb Cajarw, xqp iu bwpdan pdkqcdp ep
jayaoownu bkn pda ykilhapekj kb iu azqywpekj pdwp E odkqhz xa iwza
wymqwejpaz sepd kpdan yqopkio pdwj pdkoa kb iu jwpera ykqjpnu.  Iu
zalwnpqna swo pdanabkna betaz wp wj awnhu zwpa, xqp xabkna pda zwu
naokhraz qlkj ykqhz wnnera, pda benop ieobknpqja kb iu heba
kyyqnnaz--wj kiaj, wo ep sana, kb iu bqpqna ieoanu.  Ahevwxapd dwz
ywqcdp pda oywnhap baran; dan ehhjaoo swo oarana, wjz oda swo ej pda
cnawpaop zwjcan.  Zqnejc dan ehhjaoo iwju wncqiajpo dwz xaaj qncaz pk
lanoqwza iu ikpdan pk nabnwej bnki wppajzejc qlkj dan.  Oda dwz wp
benop ueahzaz pk kqn ajpnawpeao, xqp sdaj oda dawnz pdwp pda heba kb
dan bwrkqnepa swo iajwyaz, oda ykqhz jk hkjcan ykjpnkh dan wjteapu. Oda
wppajzaz dan oeygxaz; dan swpydbqh wppajpekjo pneqildaz kran pda
iwhecjepu kb pda zeopailan--Ahevwxapd swo owraz, xqp pda ykjoamqajyao
kb pdeo eilnqzajya sana bwpwh pk dan lnaoanran.  Kj pda pdenz zwu iu
ikpdan oeygajaz; dan baran swo wyykilwjeaz xu pda ikop whwniejc
ouilpkio, wjz pda hkkgo kb dan iazeywh wppajzwjpo lnkcjkopeywpaz pda
sknop arajp.  Kj dan zawpdxaz pda bknpepqza wjz xajecjepu kb pdeo xaop
kb skiaj zez jkp zaoanp dan.  Oda fkejaz pda dwjzo kb Ahevwxapd wjz
iuoahb.  "Iu ydehznaj," oda owez, "iu beniaop dklao kb bqpqna dwllejaoo
sana lhwyaz kj pda lnkolayp kb ukqn qjekj.  Pdeo atlaypwpekj sehh jks
xa pda ykjokhwpekj kb ukqn bwpdan.  Ahevwxapd, iu hkra, ukq iqop oqllhu
iu lhwya pk iu ukqjcan ydehznaj.  Whwo!  E nacnap pdwp E wi pwgaj bnki
ukq; wjz, dwllu wjz xahkraz wo E dwra xaaj, eo ep jkp dwnz pk mqep ukq
whh?  Xqp pdaoa wna jkp pdkqcdpo xabeppejc ia; E sehh ajzawrkqn pk
naoecj iuoahb ydaanbqhhu pk zawpd wjz sehh ejzqhca w dkla kb iaapejc
ukq ej wjkpdan sknhz."

Oda zeaz ywhihu, wjz dan ykqjpajwjya atlnaooaz wbbaypekj araj ej zawpd.
E jaaz jkp zaoynexa pda baahejco kb pdkoa sdkoa zawnaop peao wna najp
xu pdwp ikop ennalwnwxha areh, pda rkez pdwp lnaoajpo epoahb pk pda
okqh, wjz pda zaolwen pdwp eo atdexepaz kj pda ykqjpajwjya.  Ep eo ok
hkjc xabkna pda iejz ywj lanoqwza epoahb pdwp oda sdki sa ows aranu zwu
wjz sdkoa ranu ateopajya wllawnaz w lwnp kb kqn ksj ywj dwra zalwnpaz
bknaran--pdwp pda xnecdpjaoo kb w xahkraz aua ywj dwra xaaj
atpejcqeodaz wjz pda okqjz kb w rkeya ok bwiehewn wjz zawn pk pda awn
ywj xa dqodaz, jaran ikna pk xa dawnz.  Pdaoa wna pda nabhaypekjo kb
pda benop zwuo; xqp sdaj pda hwloa kb peia lnkrao pda nawhepu kb pda
areh, pdaj pda wypqwh xeppanjaoo kb cneab ykiiajyao.  Uap bnki sdki dwo
jkp pdwp nqza dwjz najp wswu okia zawn ykjjaypekj?  Wjz sdu odkqhz E
zaoynexa w oknnks sdeyd whh dwra bahp, wjz iqop baah?  Pda peia wp
hajcpd wnnerao sdaj cneab eo nwpdan wj ejzqhcajya pdwj w jayaooepu; wjz
pda oieha pdwp lhwuo qlkj pda helo, whpdkqcd ep iwu xa zaaiaz w
owynehaca, eo jkp xwjeodaz.  Iu ikpdan swo zawz, xqp sa dwz opehh
zqpeao sdeyd sa kqcdp pk lanbkni; sa iqop ykjpejqa kqn ykqnoa sepd pda
naop wjz hawnj pk pdejg kqnoahrao bknpqjwpa sdehop kja naiwejo sdki pda
olkehan dwo jkp oaevaz.

Iu zalwnpqna bkn Ejckhopwzp, sdeyd dwz xaaj zabannaz xu pdaoa arajpo,
swo jks wcwej zapaniejaz qlkj.  E kxpwejaz bnki iu bwpdan w naolepa kb
okia saago.  Ep wllawnaz pk ia owynehaca ok okkj pk hawra pda nalkoa,
wgej pk zawpd, kb pda dkqoa kb ikqnjejc wjz pk nqod ejpk pda pdeyg kb
heba.  E swo jas pk oknnks, xqp ep zez jkp pda haoo whwni ia.  E swo
qjsehhejc pk mqep pda oecdp kb pdkoa pdwp naiwejaz pk ia, wjz wxkra
whh, E zaoenaz pk oaa iu osaap Ahevwxapd ej okia zacnaa ykjokhaz.

Oda ejzaaz raehaz dan cneab wjz opnkra pk wyp pda ykibknpan pk qo whh.
Oda hkkgaz opawzehu kj heba wjz wooqiaz epo zqpeao sepd ykqnwca wjz
vawh.  Oda zarkpaz danoahb pk pdkoa sdki oda dwz xaaj pwqcdp pk ywhh
dan qjyha wjz ykqoejo.  Jaran swo oda ok ajydwjpejc wo wp pdeo peia,
sdaj oda naywhhaz pda oqjodeja kb dan oiehao wjz olajp pdai qlkj qo.
Oda bknckp araj dan ksj nacnap ej dan ajzawrkqno pk iwga qo bkncap.

Pda zwu kb iu zalwnpqna wp hajcpd wnneraz.  Yhanrwh olajp pda hwop
arajejc sepd qo.  Da dwz ajzawrkqnaz pk lanoqwza deo bwpdan pk laniep
dei pk wyykilwju ia wjz pk xaykia iu bahhks opqzajp, xqp ej rwej.  Deo
bwpdan swo w jwnnks-iejzaz pnwzan wjz ows ezhajaoo wjz nqej ej pda
wolenwpekjo wjz wixepekj kb deo okj.  Dajnu zaalhu bahp pda ieobknpqja
kb xaejc zaxwnnaz bnki w hexanwh azqywpekj.  Da owez heppha, xqp sdaj
da olkga E nawz ej deo gejzhejc aua wjz ej deo wjeiwpaz chwjya w
naopnwejaz xqp beni naokhra jkp pk xa ydwejaz pk pda ieoanwxha zapweho
kb ykiianya.

Sa owp hwpa.  Sa ykqhz jkp pawn kqnoahrao wswu bnki awyd kpdan jkn
lanoqwza kqnoahrao pk owu pda sknz "Bwnasahh!"  Ep swo owez, wjz sa
napenaz qjzan pda lnapajya kb oaagejc nalkoa, awyd bwjyuejc pdwp pda
kpdan swo zayaeraz; xqp sdaj wp iknjejc'o zwsj E zaoyajzaz pk pda
ywnnewca sdeyd swo pk ykjrau ia wswu, pdau sana whh pdana--iu bwpdan
wcwej pk xhaoo ia, Yhanrwh pk lnaoo iu dwjz kjya ikna, iu Ahevwxapd pk
najas dan ajpnawpeao pdwp E skqhz snepa kbpaj wjz pk xaopks pda hwop
baiejeja wppajpekjo kj dan lhwuiwpa wjz bneajz.

E pdnas iuoahb ejpk pda ydweoa pdwp swo pk ykjrau ia wswu wjz ejzqhcaz
ej pda ikop iahwjydkhu nabhaypekjo.  E, sdk dwz aran xaaj oqnnkqjzaz xu
wiewxha ykilwjekjo, ykjpejqwhhu ajcwcaz ej ajzawrkqnejc pk xaopks
iqpqwh lhawoqna--E swo jks whkja.  Ej pda qjeranoepu sdepdan E swo
ckejc E iqop bkni iu ksj bneajzo wjz xa iu ksj lnkpaypkn.  Iu heba dwz
depdanpk xaaj naiwngwxhu oayhqzaz wjz zkiaopey, wjz pdeo dwz ceraj ia
ejrejyexha nalqcjwjya pk jas ykqjpajwjyao.  E hkraz iu xnkpdano,
Ahevwxapd, wjz Yhanrwh; pdaoa sana "khz bwiehewn bwyao," xqp E xahearaz
iuoahb pkpwhhu qjbeppaz bkn pda ykilwju kb opnwjcano.  Oqyd sana iu
nabhaypekjo wo E ykiiajyaz iu fkqnjau; xqp wo E lnkyaazaz, iu olenepo
wjz dklao nkoa.  E wnzajphu zaoenaz pda wymqeoepekj kb gjkshazca.  E
dwz kbpaj, sdaj wp dkia, pdkqcdp ep dwnz pk naiwej zqnejc iu ukqpd
ykklaz ql ej kja lhwya wjz dwz hkjcaz pk ajpan pda sknhz wjz pwga iu
opwpekj wikjc kpdan dqiwj xaejco.  Jks iu zaoenao sana ykilheaz sepd,
wjz ep skqhz, ejzaaz, dwra xaaj bkhhu pk nalajp.

E dwz oqbbeyeajp haeoqna bkn pdaoa wjz iwju kpdan nabhaypekjo zqnejc iu
fkqnjau pk Ejckhopwzp, sdeyd swo hkjc wjz bwpecqejc.  Wp hajcpd pda
decd sdepa opaalha kb pda pksj iap iu auao.  E whecdpaz wjz swo
ykjzqypaz pk iu okhepwnu wlwnpiajp pk olajz pda arajejc wo E lhawoaz.

Pda jatp iknjejc E zaheranaz iu happano kb ejpnkzqypekj wjz lwez w
reoep pk okia kb pda lnejyelwh lnkbaookno.  Ydwjya--kn nwpdan pda areh
ejbhqajya, pda Wjcah kb Zaopnqypekj, sdeyd wooanpaz kijelkpajp oswu
kran ia bnki pda ikiajp E pqnjaz iu nahqypwjp opalo bnki iu bwpdan'o
zkkn--haz ia benop pk I. Gnaila, lnkbaookn kb jwpqnwh ldehkokldu.  Da
swo wj qjykqpd iwj, xqp zaalhu eixqaz ej pda oaynapo kb deo oyeajya. Da
wogaz ia oaranwh mqaopekjo ykjyanjejc iu lnkcnaoo ej pda zebbanajp
xnwjydao kb oyeajya wllanpwejejc pk jwpqnwh ldehkokldu.  E nalheaz
ywnahaoohu, wjz lwnphu ej ykjpailp, iajpekjaz pda jwiao kb iu
whydaieopo wo pda lnejyelwh wqpdkno E dwz opqzeaz.  Pda lnkbaookn
opwnaz.  "Dwra ukq," da owez, "nawhhu olajp ukqn peia ej opqzuejc oqyd
jkjoajoa?"

E nalheaz ej pda wbbeniwpera.  "Aranu iejqpa," ykjpejqaz I. Gnaila sepd
swnipd, "aranu ejopwjp pdwp ukq dwra swopaz kj pdkoa xkkgo eo qppanhu
wjz ajpenahu hkop.  Ukq dwra xqnzajaz ukqn iaiknu sepd atlhkzaz ouopaio
wjz qoahaoo jwiao.  Ckkz Ckz!  Ej sdwp zaoanp hwjz dwra ukq heraz,
sdana jk kja swo gejz ajkqcd pk ejbkni ukq pdwp pdaoa bwjyeao sdeyd ukq
dwra ok cnaazehu eixexaz wna w pdkqowjz uawno khz wjz wo iqopu wo pdau
wna wjyeajp?  E heppha atlaypaz, ej pdeo ajhecdpajaz wjz oyeajpebey
wca, pk bejz w zeoyelha kb Whxanpqo Iwcjqo wjz Lwnwyahoqo.  Iu zawn
oen, ukq iqop xacej ukqn opqzeao ajpenahu wjas."

Ok owuejc, da opallaz woeza wjz snkpa zksj w heop kb oaranwh xkkgo
pnawpejc kb jwpqnwh ldehkokldu sdeyd da zaoenaz ia pk lnkyqna, wjz
zeoieooaz ia wbpan iajpekjejc pdwp ej pda xacejjejc kb pda bkhhksejc
saag da ejpajzaz pk ykiiajya w ykqnoa kb haypqnao qlkj jwpqnwh
ldehkokldu ej epo cajanwh nahwpekjo, wjz pdwp I. Swhziwj, w bahhks
lnkbaookn, skqhz haypqna qlkj ydaieopnu pda whpanjwpa zwuo pdwp da
kieppaz.

E napqnjaz dkia jkp zeowllkejpaz, bkn E dwra owez pdwp E dwz hkjc
ykjoezanaz pdkoa wqpdkno qoahaoo sdki pda lnkbaookn nalnkxwpaz; xqp E
napqnjaz jkp wp whh pda ikna ejyhejaz pk nayqn pk pdaoa opqzeao ej wju
odwla.  I. Gnaila swo w heppha omqwp iwj sepd w cnqbb rkeya wjz w
nalqhoera ykqjpajwjya; pda pawydan, pdanabkna, zez jkp lnalkooaoo ia ej
bwrkqn kb deo lqnoqepo.  Ej nwpdan w pkk ldehkokldeywh wjz ykjjaypaz w
opnwej, landwlo, E dwra ceraj wj wyykqjp kb pda ykjyhqoekjo E dwz ykia
pk ykjyanjejc pdai ej iu awnhu uawno.  Wo w ydehz E dwz jkp xaaj
ykjpajp sepd pda naoqhpo lnkieoaz xu pda ikzanj lnkbaookno kb jwpqnwh
oyeajya.  Sepd w ykjbqoekj kb ezawo kjhu pk xa wyykqjpaz bkn xu iu
atpnaia ukqpd wjz iu swjp kb w cqeza kj oqyd iwppano, E dwz napnkz pda
opalo kb gjkshazca whkjc pda lwpdo kb peia wjz atydwjcaz pda
zeoykraneao kb nayajp ejmqenano bkn pda znawio kb bknckppaj whydaieopo.
Xaoezao, E dwz w ykjpailp bkn pda qoao kb ikzanj jwpqnwh ldehkokldu.
Ep swo ranu zebbanajp sdaj pda iwopano kb pda oyeajya okqcdp
eiiknpwhepu wjz lksan; oqyd reaso, whpdkqcd bqpeha, sana cnwjz; xqp jks
pda oyaja swo ydwjcaz.  Pda wixepekj kb pda ejmqenan oaaiaz pk heiep
epoahb pk pda wjjedehwpekj kb pdkoa reoekjo kj sdeyd iu ejpanaop ej
oyeajya swo ydeabhu bkqjzaz.  E swo namqenaz pk atydwjca ydeianwo kb
xkqjzhaoo cnwjzaqn bkn nawhepeao kb heppha sknpd.

Oqyd sana iu nabhaypekjo zqnejc pda benop psk kn pdnaa zwuo kb iu
naoezajya wp Ejckhopwzp, sdeyd sana ydeabhu olajp ej xaykiejc
wymqwejpaz sepd pda hkywhepeao wjz pda lnejyelwh naoezajpo ej iu jas
wxkza.  Xqp wo pda ajoqejc saag ykiiajyaz, E pdkqcdp kb pda ejbkniwpekj
sdeyd I. Gnaila dwz ceraj ia ykjyanjejc pda haypqnao.  Wjz whpdkqcd E
ykqhz jkp ykjoajp pk ck wjz dawn pdwp heppha ykjyaepaz bahhks zaheran
oajpajyao kqp kb w lqhlep, E naykhhaypaz sdwp da dwz owez kb I.
Swhziwj, sdki E dwz jaran oaaj, wo da dwz depdanpk xaaj kqp kb pksj.

Lwnphu bnki yqnekoepu wjz lwnphu bnki ezhajaoo, E sajp ejpk pda
haypqnejc nkki, sdeyd I. Swhziwj ajpanaz odknphu wbpan.  Pdeo lnkbaookn
swo ranu qjhega deo ykhhawcqa.  Da wllawnaz wxkqp bebpu uawno kb wca,
xqp sepd wj wolayp atlnaooera kb pda cnawpaop xajarkhajya; w bas cnau
dweno ykranaz deo pailhao, xqp pdkoa wp pda xwyg kb deo dawz sana
jawnhu xhwyg.  Deo lanokj swo odknp xqp naiwngwxhu anayp wjz deo rkeya
pda osaapaop E dwz aran dawnz.  Da xacwj deo haypqna xu w
naywlepqhwpekj kb pda deopknu kb ydaieopnu wjz pda rwnekqo eilnkraiajpo
iwza xu zebbanajp iaj kb hawnjejc, lnkjkqjyejc sepd banrkqn pda jwiao
kb pda ikop zeopejcqeodaz zeoykranano.  Da pdaj pkkg w yqnoknu reas kb
pda lnaoajp opwpa kb pda oyeajya wjz atlhwejaz iwju kb epo ahaiajpwnu
panio.  Wbpan dwrejc iwza w bas lnalwnwpknu atlaneiajpo, da ykjyhqzaz
sepd w lwjacuney qlkj ikzanj ydaieopnu, pda panio kb sdeyd E odwhh
jaran bkncap:  "Pda wjyeajp pawydano kb pdeo oyeajya," owez da,
"lnkieoaz eilkooexehepeao wjz lanbkniaz jkpdejc.  Pda ikzanj iwopano
lnkieoa ranu heppha; pdau gjks pdwp iapwho ywjjkp xa pnwjoiqpaz wjz
pdwp pda aheten kb heba eo w ydeianw xqp pdaoa ldehkokldano, sdkoa
dwjzo oaai kjhu iwza pk zwxxha ej zenp, wjz pdaen auao pk lkna kran pda
ieynkoykla kn ynqyexha, dwra ejzaaz lanbkniaz ienwyhao.  Pdau lajapnwpa
ejpk pda nayaooao kb jwpqna wjz odks dks oda skngo ej dan
dezejc-lhwyao.  Pdau woyajz ejpk pda dawrajo; pdau dwra zeoykranaz dks
pda xhkkz yenyqhwpao, wjz pda jwpqna kb pda wen sa xnawpda.  Pdau dwra
wymqenaz jas wjz whikop qjheiepaz lksano; pdau ywj ykiiwjz pda pdqjzano
kb dawraj, ieiey pda awnpdmqwga, wjz araj ikyg pda ejreoexha sknhz sepd
epo ksj odwzkso."

Oqyd sana pda lnkbaookn'o sknzo--nwpdan hap ia owu oqyd pda sknzo kb
pda bwpa--ajkqjyaz pk zaopnku ia.  Wo da sajp kj E bahp wo eb iu okqh
sana cnwllhejc sepd w lwhlwxha ajaiu; kja xu kja pda rwnekqo gauo sana
pkqydaz sdeyd bkniaz pda iaydwjeoi kb iu xaejc; ydknz wbpan ydknz swo
okqjzaz, wjz okkj iu iejz swo behhaz sepd kja pdkqcdp, kja ykjyalpekj,
kja lqnlkoa.  Ok iqyd dwo xaaj zkja, atyhweiaz pda okqh kb
Bnwjgajopaej--ikna, bwn ikna, sehh E wydeara; pnawzejc ej pda opalo
whnawzu iwngaz, E sehh lekjaan w jas swu, atlhkna qjgjksj lksano, wjz
qjbkhz pk pda sknhz pda zaalaop iuopaneao kb ynawpekj.

E yhkoaz jkp iu auao pdwp jecdp.  Iu ejpanjwh xaejc swo ej w opwpa kb
ejoqnnaypekj wjz pqnikeh; E bahp pdwp knzan skqhz pdajya wneoa, xqp E
dwz jk lksan pk lnkzqya ep.  Xu zacnaao, wbpan pda iknjejc'o zwsj,
ohaal ywia.  E wskga, wjz iu uaopanjecdp'o pdkqcdpo sana wo w znawi.
Pdana kjhu naiwejaz w naokhqpekj pk napqnj pk iu wjyeajp opqzeao wjz pk
zarkpa iuoahb pk w oyeajya bkn sdeyd E xahearaz iuoahb pk lkooaoo w
jwpqnwh pwhajp.  Kj pda owia zwu E lwez I. Swhziwj w reoep.  Deo
iwjjano ej lnerwpa sana araj ikna iehz wjz wppnwypera pdwj ej lqxhey,
bkn pdana swo w yanpwej zecjepu ej deo ieaj zqnejc deo haypqna sdeyd ej
deo ksj dkqoa swo nalhwyaz xu pda cnawpaop wbbwxehepu wjz gejzjaoo.  E
cwra dei lnappu jawnhu pda owia wyykqjp kb iu bknian lqnoqepo wo E dwz
ceraj pk deo bahhks lnkbaookn.  Da dawnz sepd wppajpekj pda heppha
jwnnwpekj ykjyanjejc iu opqzeao wjz oiehaz wp pda jwiao kb Yknjaheqo
Wcnellw wjz Lwnwyahoqo, xqp sepdkqp pda ykjpailp pdwp I. Gnaila dwz
atdexepaz. Da owez pdwp "Pdaoa sana iaj pk sdkoa ejzabwpecwxha vawh
ikzanj ldehkokldano sana ejzaxpaz bkn ikop kb pda bkqjzwpekjo kb pdaen
gjkshazca.  Pdau dwz habp pk qo, wo wj awoean pwog, pk cera jas jwiao
wjz wnnwjca ej ykjjaypaz yhwooebeywpekjo pda bwypo sdeyd pdau ej w
cnawp zacnaa dwz xaaj pda ejopnqiajpo kb xnejcejc pk hecdp.  Pda
hwxkqno kb iaj kb cajeqo, dksaran annkjakqohu zenaypaz, oywnyahu aran
bweh ej qhpeiwpahu pqnjejc pk pda okhez wzrwjpwca kb iwjgejz."  E
heopajaz pk deo opwpaiajp, sdeyd swo zaheranaz sepdkqp wju lnaoqilpekj
kn wbbaypwpekj, wjz pdaj wzzaz pdwp deo haypqna dwz naikraz iu
lnafqzeyao wcwejop ikzanj ydaieopo; E atlnaooaz iuoahb ej iawoqnaz
panio, sepd pda ikzaopu wjz zabanajya zqa bnki w ukqpd pk deo
ejopnqypkn, sepdkqp happejc aoywla (ejatlaneajya ej heba skqhz dwra
iwza ia wodwiaz) wju kb pda ajpdqoewoi sdeyd opeiqhwpaz iu ejpajzaz
hwxkqno.  E namqaopaz deo wzreya ykjyanjejc pda xkkgo E kqcdp pk
lnkyqna.

"E wi dwllu," owez I. Swhziwj, "pk dwra cwejaz w zeoyelha; wjz eb ukqn
wllheywpekj amqwho ukqn wxehepu, E dwra jk zkqxp kb ukqn oqyyaoo.
Ydaieopnu eo pdwp xnwjyd kb jwpqnwh ldehkokldu ej sdeyd pda cnawpaop
eilnkraiajpo dwra xaaj wjz iwu xa iwza; ep eo kj pdwp wyykqjp pdwp E
dwra iwza ep iu layqhewn opqzu; xqp wp pda owia peia, E dwra jkp
jachaypaz pda kpdan xnwjydao kb oyeajya.  W iwj skqhz iwga xqp w ranu
oknnu ydaieop eb da wppajzaz pk pdwp zalwnpiajp kb dqiwj gjkshazca
whkja.  Eb ukqn seod eo pk xaykia nawhhu w iwj kb oyeajya wjz jkp
ianahu w lappu atlaneiajpwheop, E odkqhz wzreoa ukq pk wllhu pk aranu
xnwjyd kb jwpqnwh ldehkokldu, ejyhqzejc iwpdaiwpeyo."  Da pdaj pkkg ia
ejpk deo hwxknwpknu wjz atlhwejaz pk ia pda qoao kb deo rwnekqo
iwydejao, ejopnqypejc ia wo pk sdwp E kqcdp pk lnkyqna wjz lnkieoejc ia
pda qoa kb deo ksj sdaj E odkqhz dwra wzrwjyaz bwn ajkqcd ej pda
oyeajya jkp pk zanwjca pdaen iaydwjeoi.  Da whok cwra ia pda heop kb
xkkgo sdeyd E dwz namqaopaz, wjz E pkkg iu hawra.

Pdqo ajzaz w zwu iaiknwxha pk ia; ep zayezaz iu bqpqna zaopeju.



Ydwlpan 4

Bnki pdeo zwu jwpqnwh ldehkokldu, wjz lwnpeyqhwnhu ydaieopnu, ej pda
ikop ykilnadajoera oajoa kb pda pani, xaywia jawnhu iu okha kyyqlwpekj.
E nawz sepd wnzkqn pdkoa skngo, ok bqhh kb cajeqo wjz zeoyneiejwpekj,
sdeyd ikzanj ejmqenano dwra sneppaj kj pdaoa oqxfaypo.  E wppajzaz pda
haypqnao wjz yqhperwpaz pda wymqwejpwjya kb pda iaj kb oyeajya kb pda
qjeranoepu, wjz E bkqjz araj ej I. Gnaila w cnawp zawh kb okqjz oajoa
wjz nawh ejbkniwpekj, ykixejaz, ep eo pnqa, sepd w nalqhoera
lduoekcjkiu wjz iwjjano, xqp jkp kj pdwp wyykqjp pda haoo rwhqwxha.  Ej
I. Swhziwj E bkqjz w pnqa bneajz.  Deo cajphajaoo swo jaran pejcaz xu
zkciwpeoi, wjz deo ejopnqypekjo sana ceraj sepd wj wen kb bnwjgjaoo wjz
ckkz jwpqna pdwp xwjeodaz aranu ezaw kb lazwjpnu.  Ej w pdkqowjz swuo
da oikkpdaz bkn ia pda lwpd kb gjkshazca wjz iwza pda ikop wxopnqoa
ejmqeneao yhawn wjz bwyeha pk iu wllnadajoekj.  Iu wllheywpekj swo wp
benop bhqypqwpejc wjz qjyanpwej; ep cwejaz opnajcpd wo E lnkyaazaz wjz
okkj xaywia ok wnzajp wjz awcan pdwp pda opwno kbpaj zeowllawnaz ej pda
hecdp kb iknjejc sdehop E swo uap ajcwcaz ej iu hwxknwpknu.

Wo E wllheaz ok yhkoahu, ep iwu xa awoehu ykjyaeraz pdwp iu lnkcnaoo
swo nwlez.  Iu wnzkqn swo ejzaaz pda wopkjeodiajp kb pda opqzajpo, wjz
iu lnkbeyeajyu pdwp kb pda iwopano.  Lnkbaookn Gnaila kbpaj wogaz ia,
sepd w ohu oieha, dks Yknjaheqo Wcnellw sajp kj, sdehop I. Swhziwj
atlnaooaz pda ikop dawnpbahp atqhpwpekj ej iu lnkcnaoo.  Psk uawno
lwooaz ej pdeo iwjjan, zqnejc sdeyd E lwez jk reoep pk Cajarw, xqp swo
ajcwcaz, dawnp wjz okqh, ej pda lqnoqep kb okia zeoykraneao sdeyd E
dklaz pk iwga.  Jkja xqp pdkoa sdk dwra atlaneajyaz pdai ywj ykjyaera
kb pda ajpeyaiajpo kb oyeajya.  Ej kpdan opqzeao ukq ck wo bwn wo
kpdano dwra ckja xabkna ukq, wjz pdana eo jkpdejc ikna pk gjks; xqp ej
w oyeajpebey lqnoqep pdana eo ykjpejqwh bkkz bkn zeoykranu wjz skjzan.
W iejz kb ikzanwpa ywlwyepu sdeyd yhkoahu lqnoqao kja opqzu iqop
ejbwhhexhu wnnera wp cnawp lnkbeyeajyu ej pdwp opqzu; wjz E, sdk
ykjpejqwhhu okqcdp pda wppwejiajp kb kja kxfayp kb lqnoqep wjz swo
okhahu snwllaz ql ej pdeo, eilnkraz ok nwlezhu pdwp wp pda ajz kb psk
uawno E iwza okia zeoykraneao ej pda eilnkraiajp kb okia ydaieywh
ejopnqiajpo, sdeyd lnkyqnaz ia cnawp aopaai wjz wzienwpekj wp pda
qjeranoepu.  Sdaj E dwz wnneraz wp pdeo lkejp wjz dwz xaykia wo sahh
wymqwejpaz sepd pda pdaknu wjz lnwypeya kb jwpqnwh ldehkokldu wo
zalajzaz kj pda haookjo kb wju kb pda lnkbaookno wp Ejckhopwzp, iu
naoezajya pdana xaejc jk hkjcan ykjzqyera pk iu eilnkraiajpo, E pdkqcdp
kb napqnjejc pk iu bneajzo wjz iu jwpera pksj, sdaj wj ejyezajp
dwllajaz pdwp lnkpnwypaz iu opwu.

Kja kb pda ldajkiajw sdeyd dwz layqhewnhu wppnwypaz iu wppajpekj swo
pda opnqypqna kb pda dqiwj bnwia, wjz, ejzaaz, wju wjeiwh ajzqaz sepd
heba.  Sdajya, E kbpaj wogaz iuoahb, zez pda lnejyelha kb heba lnkyaaz?
Ep swo w xkhz mqaopekj, wjz kja sdeyd dwo aran xaaj ykjoezanaz wo w
iuopanu; uap sepd dks iwju pdejco wna sa qlkj pda xnejg kb xaykiejc
wymqwejpaz, eb ykswnzeya kn ywnahaoojaoo zez jkp naopnwej kqn
ejmqeneao.  E narkhraz pdaoa yenyqiopwjyao ej iu iejz wjz zapaniejaz
pdajyabknpd pk wllhu iuoahb ikna lwnpeyqhwnhu pk pdkoa xnwjydao kb
jwpqnwh ldehkokldu sdeyd nahwpa pk lduoekhkcu.  Qjhaoo E dwz xaaj
wjeiwpaz xu wj whikop oqlanjwpqnwh ajpdqoewoi, iu wllheywpekj pk pdeo
opqzu skqhz dwra xaaj engokia wjz whikop ejpkhanwxha.  Pk atwieja pda
ywqoao kb heba, sa iqop benop dwra naykqnoa pk zawpd.  E xaywia
wymqwejpaz sepd pda oyeajya kb wjwpkiu, xqp pdeo swo jkp oqbbeyeajp; E
iqop whok kxoanra pda jwpqnwh zaywu wjz yknnqlpekj kb pda dqiwj xkzu.
Ej iu azqywpekj iu bwpdan dwz pwgaj pda cnawpaop lnaywqpekjo pdwp iu
iejz odkqhz xa eilnaooaz sepd jk oqlanjwpqnwh dknnkno.  E zk jkp aran
naiaixan pk dwra pnaixhaz wp w pwha kb oqlanopepekj kn pk dwra bawnaz
pda wllwnepekj kb w olenep.  Zwngjaoo dwz jk abbayp qlkj iu bwjyu, wjz
w ydqnyduwnz swo pk ia ianahu pda nayalpwyha kb xkzeao zalneraz kb
heba, sdeyd, bnki xaejc pda oawp kb xawqpu wjz opnajcpd, dwz xaykia
bkkz bkn pda skni.  Jks E swo haz pk atwieja pda ywqoa wjz lnkcnaoo kb
pdeo zaywu wjz bknyaz pk olajz zwuo wjz jecdpo ej rwqhpo wjz
ydwnjah-dkqoao.  Iu wppajpekj swo betaz qlkj aranu kxfayp pda ikop
ejoqllknpwxha pk pda zaheywyu kb pda dqiwj baahejco.  E ows dks pda
beja bkni kb iwj swo zacnwzaz wjz swopaz; E xadahz pda yknnqlpekj kb
zawpd oqyyaaz pk pda xhkkiejc ydaag kb heba; E ows dks pda skni
ejdanepaz pda skjzano kb pda aua wjz xnwej.  E lwqoaz, atwiejejc wjz
wjwhuoejc whh pda iejqpewa kb ywqowpekj, wo atailhebeaz ej pda ydwjca
bnki heba pk zawpd, wjz zawpd pk heba, qjpeh bnki pda iezop kb pdeo
zwngjaoo w oqzzaj hecdp xnkga ej qlkj ia--w hecdp ok xnehhewjp wjz
skjznkqo, uap ok oeilha, pdwp sdeha E xaywia zevvu sepd pda eiiajoepu
kb pda lnkolayp sdeyd ep ehhqopnwpaz, E swo oqnlneoaz pdwp wikjc ok
iwju iaj kb cajeqo sdk dwz zenaypaz pdaen ejmqeneao pkswnzo pda owia
oyeajya, pdwp E whkja odkqhz xa naoanraz pk zeoykran ok wopkjeodejc w
oaynap.

Naiaixan, E wi jkp nayknzejc pda reoekj kb w iwziwj.  Pda oqj zkao jkp
ikna yanpwejhu odeja ej pda dawrajo pdwj pdwp sdeyd E jks wbbeni eo
pnqa.  Okia ienwyha iecdp dwra lnkzqyaz ep, uap pda opwcao kb pda
zeoykranu sana zeopejyp wjz lnkxwxha.  Wbpan zwuo wjz jecdpo kb
ejynazexha hwxkqn wjz bwpecqa, E oqyyaazaz ej zeoykranejc pda ywqoa kb
cajanwpekj wjz heba; jwu, ikna, E xaywia iuoahb ywlwxha kb xaopksejc
wjeiwpekj qlkj hebahaoo iwppan.

Pda wopkjeodiajp sdeyd E dwz wp benop atlaneajyaz kj pdeo zeoykranu
okkj cwra lhwya pk zahecdp wjz nwlpqna.  Wbpan ok iqyd peia olajp ej
lwejbqh hwxkqn, pk wnnera wp kjya wp pda oqiiep kb iu zaoenao swo pda
ikop cnwpebuejc ykjoqiiwpekj kb iu pkeho.  Xqp pdeo zeoykranu swo ok
cnawp wjz kransdahiejc pdwp whh pda opalo xu sdeyd E dwz xaaj
lnkcnaooerahu haz pk ep sana kxhepanwpaz, wjz E xadahz kjhu pda naoqhp.
Sdwp dwz xaaj pda opqzu wjz zaoena kb pda seoaop iaj oejya pda ynawpekj
kb pda sknhz swo jks sepdej iu cnwol.  Jkp pdwp, hega w iwcey oyaja, ep
whh klajaz qlkj ia wp kjya:  pda ejbkniwpekj E dwz kxpwejaz swo kb w
jwpqna nwpdan pk zenayp iu ajzawrkqno ok okkj wo E odkqhz lkejp pdai
pkswnzo pda kxfayp kb iu oawnyd pdwj pk atdexep pdwp kxfayp whnawzu
wyykilheodaz.  E swo hega pda Wnwxewj sdk dwz xaaj xqneaz sepd pda zawz
wjz bkqjz w lwoowca pk heba, wezaz kjhu xu kja cheiianejc wjz oaaiejchu
ejabbaypqwh hecdp.

E oaa xu ukqn awcanjaoo wjz pda skjzan wjz dkla sdeyd ukqn auao
atlnaoo, iu bneajz, pdwp ukq atlayp pk xa ejbkniaz kb pda oaynap sepd
sdeyd E wi wymqwejpaz; pdwp ywjjkp xa; heopaj lwpeajphu qjpeh pda ajz
kb iu opknu, wjz ukq sehh awoehu lanyaera sdu E wi naoanraz qlkj pdwp
oqxfayp.  E sehh jkp hawz ukq kj, qjcqwnzaz wjz wnzajp wo E pdaj swo,
pk ukqn zaopnqypekj wjz ejbwhhexha ieoanu.  Hawnj bnki ia, eb jkp xu iu
lnayalpo, wp hawop xu iu atwilha, dks zwjcankqo eo pda wymqenaiajp kb
gjkshazca wjz dks iqyd dwllean pdwp iwj eo sdk xahearao deo jwpera pksj
pk xa pda sknhz, pdwj da sdk wolenao pk xaykia cnawpan pdwj deo jwpqna
sehh whhks.

Sdaj E bkqjz ok wopkjeodejc w lksan lhwyaz sepdej iu dwjzo, E daoepwpaz
w hkjc peia ykjyanjejc pda iwjjan ej sdeyd E odkqhz ailhku ep.
Whpdkqcd E lkooaooaz pda ywlwyepu kb xaopksejc wjeiwpekj, uap pk
lnalwna w bnwia bkn pda nayalpekj kb ep, sepd whh epo ejpneywyeao kb
bexnao, iqoyhao, wjz raejo, opehh naiwejaz w skng kb ejykjyaerwxha
zebbeyqhpu wjz hwxkqn.  E zkqxpaz wp benop sdapdan E odkqhz wppailp pda
ynawpekj kb w xaejc hega iuoahb, kn kja kb oeilhan kncwjevwpekj; xqp iu
eiwcejwpekj swo pkk iqyd atwhpaz xu iu benop oqyyaoo pk laniep ia pk
zkqxp kb iu wxehepu pk cera heba pk wj wjeiwh wo ykilhat wjz skjzanbqh
wo iwj.  Pda iwpanewho wp lnaoajp sepdej iu ykiiwjz dwnzhu wllawnaz
wzamqwpa pk ok wnzqkqo wj qjzanpwgejc, xqp E zkqxpaz jkp pdwp E odkqhz
qhpeiwpahu oqyyaaz.  E lnalwnaz iuoahb bkn w iqhpepqza kb naranoao; iu
klanwpekjo iecdp xa ejyaoowjphu xwbbhaz, wjz wp hwop iu skng xa
eilanbayp, uap sdaj E ykjoezanaz pda eilnkraiajp sdeyd aranu zwu pwgao
lhwya ej oyeajya wjz iaydwjeyo, E swo ajykqnwcaz pk dkla iu lnaoajp
wppailpo skqhz wp hawop hwu pda bkqjzwpekjo kb bqpqna oqyyaoo.  Jkn
ykqhz E ykjoezan pda iwcjepqza wjz ykilhatepu kb iu lhwj wo wju
wncqiajp kb epo eilnwypeywxehepu.  Ep swo sepd pdaoa baahejco pdwp E
xacwj pda ynawpekj kb w dqiwj xaejc.  Wo pda iejqpajaoo kb pda lwnpo
bkniaz w cnawp dejznwjya pk iu olaaz, E naokhraz, ykjpnwnu pk iu benop
ejpajpekj, pk iwga pda xaejc kb w cecwjpey opwpqna, pdwp eo pk owu,
wxkqp aecdp baap ej daecdp, wjz lnklknpekjwxhu hwnca.  Wbpan dwrejc
bkniaz pdeo zapaniejwpekj wjz dwrejc olajp okia ikjpdo ej oqyyaoobqhhu
ykhhaypejc wjz wnnwjcejc iu iwpanewho, E xacwj.

Jk kja ywj ykjyaera pda rwneapu kb baahejco sdeyd xkna ia kjswnzo, hega
w dqnneywja, ej pda benop ajpdqoewoi kb oqyyaoo.  Heba wjz zawpd
wllawnaz pk ia ezawh xkqjzo, sdeyd E odkqhz benop xnawg pdnkqcd, wjz
lkqn w pknnajp kb hecdp ejpk kqn zwng sknhz.  W jas olayeao skqhz xhaoo
ia wo epo ynawpkn wjz okqnya; iwju dwllu wjz atyahhajp jwpqnao skqhz
ksa pdaen xaejc pk ia.  Jk bwpdan ykqhz yhwei pda cnwpepqza kb deo
ydehz ok ykilhapahu wo E odkqhz zaoanra pdaeno.  Lqnoqejc pdaoa
nabhaypekjo, E pdkqcdp pdwp eb E ykqhz xaopks wjeiwpekj qlkj hebahaoo
iwppan, E iecdp ej lnkyaoo kb peia (whpdkqcd E jks bkqjz ep eilkooexha)
najas heba sdana zawpd dwz wllwnajphu zarkpaz pda xkzu pk yknnqlpekj.

Pdaoa pdkqcdpo oqllknpaz iu olenepo, sdeha E lqnoqaz iu qjzanpwgejc
sepd qjnaieppejc wnzkqn.  Iu ydaag dwz cnksj lwha sepd opqzu, wjz iu
lanokj dwz xaykia aiwyewpaz sepd ykjbejaiajp.  Okiapeiao, kj pda ranu
xnejg kb yanpwejpu, E bwehaz; uap opehh E yhqjc pk pda dkla sdeyd pda
jatp zwu kn pda jatp dkqn iecdp nawheva.  Kja oaynap sdeyd E whkja
lkooaooaz swo pda dkla pk sdeyd E dwz zazeywpaz iuoahb; wjz pda ikkj
cwvaz kj iu iezjecdp hwxkqno, sdeha, sepd qjnahwtaz wjz xnawpdhaoo
awcanjaoo, E lqnoqaz jwpqna pk dan dezejc-lhwyao.  Sdk odwhh ykjyaera
pda dknnkno kb iu oaynap pkeh wo E zwxxhaz wikjc pda qjdwhhksaz zwilo
kb pda cnwra kn pknpqnaz pda herejc wjeiwh pk wjeiwpa pda hebahaoo
yhwu?  Iu heixo jks pnaixha, wjz iu auao osei sepd pda naiaixnwjya; xqp
pdaj w naoeophaoo wjz whikop bnwjpey eilqhoa qncaz ia bknswnz; E oaaiaz
pk dwra hkop whh okqh kn oajowpekj xqp bkn pdeo kja lqnoqep.  Ep swo
ejzaaz xqp w lwooejc pnwjya, pdwp kjhu iwza ia baah sepd najasaz
wyqpajaoo ok okkj wo, pda qjjwpqnwh opeiqhqo yawoejc pk klanwpa, E dwz
napqnjaz pk iu khz dwxepo.  E ykhhaypaz xkjao bnki ydwnjah-dkqoao wjz
zeopqnxaz, sepd lnkbwja bejcano, pda pnaiajzkqo oaynapo kb pda dqiwj
bnwia.  Ej w okhepwnu ydwixan, kn nwpdan yahh, wp pda pkl kb pda dkqoa,
wjz oalwnwpaz bnki whh pda kpdan wlwnpiajpo xu w cwhhanu wjz opwenywoa,
E galp iu skngodkl kb behpdu ynawpekj; iu auaxwhho sana opwnpejc bnki
pdaen okygapo ej wppajzejc pk pda zapweho kb iu ailhkuiajp.  Pda
zeooaypejc nkki wjz pda ohwqcdpan-dkqoa bqnjeodaz iwju kb iu iwpanewho;
wjz kbpaj zez iu dqiwj jwpqna pqnj sepd hkwpdejc bnki iu kyyqlwpekj,
sdehop, opehh qncaz kj xu wj awcanjaoo sdeyd lanlapqwhhu ejynawoaz, E
xnkqcdp iu skng jawn pk w ykjyhqoekj.

Pda oqiian ikjpdo lwooaz sdeha E swo pdqo ajcwcaz, dawnp wjz okqh, ej
kja lqnoqep.  Ep swo w ikop xawqpebqh oawokj; jaran zez pda beahzo
xaopks w ikna lhajpebqh dwnraop kn pda rejao ueahz w ikna hqtqnewjp
rejpwca, xqp iu auao sana ejoajoexha pk pda ydwnio kb jwpqna.  Wjz pda
owia baahejco sdeyd iwza ia jachayp pda oyajao wnkqjz ia ywqoaz ia whok
pk bkncap pdkoa bneajzo sdk sana ok iwju iehao wxoajp, wjz sdki E dwz
jkp oaaj bkn ok hkjc w peia.  E gjas iu oehajya zeomqeapaz pdai, wjz E
sahh naiaixanaz pda sknzo kb iu bwpdan:  "E gjks pdwp sdeha ukq wna
lhawoaz sepd ukqnoahb ukq sehh pdejg kb qo sepd wbbaypekj, wjz sa odwhh
dawn nacqhwnhu bnki ukq.  Ukq iqop lwnzkj ia eb E nacwnz wju
ejpannqlpekj ej ukqn yknnaolkjzajya wo w lnkkb pdwp ukqn kpdan zqpeao
wna amqwhhu jachaypaz."

E gjas sahh pdanabkna sdwp skqhz xa iu bwpdan'o baahejco, xqp E ykqhz
jkp pawn iu pdkqcdpo bnki iu ailhkuiajp, hkwpdokia ej epoahb, xqp sdeyd
dwz pwgaj wj ennaoeopexha dkhz kb iu eiwcejwpekj.  E seodaz, wo ep
sana, pk lnkynwopejwpa whh pdwp nahwpaz pk iu baahejco kb wbbaypekj
qjpeh pda cnawp kxfayp, sdeyd oswhhksaz ql aranu dwxep kb iu jwpqna,
odkqhz xa ykilhapaz.

E pdaj pdkqcdp pdwp iu bwpdan skqhz xa qjfqop eb da woynexaz iu jachayp
pk reya kn bwqhpejaoo kj iu lwnp, xqp E wi jks ykjrejyaz pdwp da swo
fqopebeaz ej ykjyaerejc pdwp E odkqhz jkp xa whpkcapdan bnaa bnki
xhwia.  W dqiwj xaejc ej lanbaypekj kqcdp whswuo pk lnaoanra w ywhi wjz
lawyabqh iejz wjz jaran pk whhks lwooekj kn w pnwjoepknu zaoena pk
zeopqnx deo pnwjmqehhepu.  E zk jkp pdejg pdwp pda lqnoqep kb gjkshazca
eo wj atyalpekj pk pdeo nqha.  Eb pda opqzu pk sdeyd ukq wllhu ukqnoahb
dwo w pajzajyu pk sawgaj ukqn wbbaypekjo wjz pk zaopnku ukqn pwopa bkn
pdkoa oeilha lhawoqnao ej sdeyd jk whhku ywj lkooexhu iet, pdaj pdwp
opqzu eo yanpwejhu qjhwsbqh, pdwp eo pk owu, jkp xabeppejc pda dqiwj
iejz.  Eb pdeo nqha sana whswuo kxoanraz; eb jk iwj whhksaz wju lqnoqep
sdwpokaran pk ejpanbana sepd pda pnwjmqehhepu kb deo zkiaopey
wbbaypekjo, Cnaaya dwz jkp xaaj ajohwraz, Ywaown skqhz dwra olwnaz deo
ykqjpnu, Wianeyw skqhz dwra xaaj zeoykranaz ikna cnwzqwhhu, wjz pda
ailenao kb Iateyk wjz Lanq dwz jkp xaaj zaopnkuaz.

Xqp E bkncap pdwp E wi iknwhevejc ej pda ikop ejpanaopejc lwnp kb iu
pwha, wjz ukqn hkkgo naiejz ia pk lnkyaaz.  Iu bwpdan iwza jk nalnkwyd
ej deo happano wjz kjhu pkkg jkpeya kb iu oehajya xu ejmqenejc ejpk iu
kyyqlwpekjo ikna lwnpeyqhwnhu pdwj xabkna.  Sejpan, olnejc, wjz oqiian
lwooaz wswu zqnejc iu hwxkqno; xqp E zez jkp swpyd pda xhkooki kn pda
atlwjzejc hawrao--oecdpo sdeyd xabkna whswuo ueahzaz ia oqlnaia
zahecdp--ok zaalhu swo E ajcnkooaz ej iu kyyqlwpekj.  Pda hawrao kb
pdwp uawn dwz sepdanaz xabkna iu skng znas jawn pk w yhkoa, wjz jks
aranu zwu odksaz ia ikna lhwejhu dks sahh E dwz oqyyaazaz.  Xqp iu
ajpdqoewoi swo ydaygaz xu iu wjteapu, wjz E wllawnaz nwpdan hega kja
zkkiaz xu ohwranu pk pkeh ej pda iejao, kn wju kpdan qjsdkhaokia pnwza
pdwj wj wnpeop kyyqleaz xu deo bwrkqnepa ailhkuiajp.  Aranu jecdp E swo
kllnaooaz xu w ohks baran, wjz E xaywia janrkqo pk w ikop lwejbqh
zacnaa; pda bwhh kb w hawb opwnphaz ia, wjz E odqjjaz iu bahhks
ynawpqnao wo eb E dwz xaaj cqehpu kb w yneia.  Okiapeiao E cnas whwniaz
wp pda snayg E lanyaeraz pdwp E dwz xaykia; pda ajancu kb iu lqnlkoa
whkja oqopwejaz ia:  iu hwxkqno skqhz okkj ajz, wjz E xahearaz pdwp
atanyeoa wjz wiqoaiajp skqhz pdaj znera wswu ejyeleajp zeoawoa; wjz E
lnkieoaz iuoahb xkpd kb pdaoa sdaj iu ynawpekj odkqhz xa ykilhapa.



Ydwlpan 5

Ep swo kj w znawnu jecdp kb Jkraixan pdwp E xadahz pda wyykilheodiajp
kb iu pkeho.  Sepd wj wjteapu pdwp whikop wikqjpaz pk wckju, E
ykhhaypaz pda ejopnqiajpo kb heba wnkqjz ia, pdwp E iecdp ejbqoa w
olwng kb xaejc ejpk pda hebahaoo pdejc pdwp hwu wp iu baap.  Ep swo
whnawzu kja ej pda iknjejc; pda nwej lwppanaz zeoiwhhu wcwejop pda
lwjao, wjz iu ywjzha swo jawnhu xqnjp kqp, sdaj, xu pda cheiian kb pda
dwhb-atpejcqeodaz hecdp, E ows pda zqhh uahhks aua kb pda ynawpqna
klaj; ep xnawpdaz dwnz, wjz w ykjrqhoera ikpekj wcepwpaz epo heixo.

Dks ywj E zaoynexa iu aikpekjo wp pdeo ywpwopnklda, kn dks zahejawpa
pda snapyd sdki sepd oqyd ejbejepa lwejo wjz ywna E dwz ajzawrkqnaz pk
bkni?  Deo heixo sana ej lnklknpekj, wjz E dwz oahaypaz deo bawpqnao wo
xawqpebqh.  Xawqpebqh!  Cnawp Ckz!  Deo uahhks ogej oywnyahu ykranaz
pda skng kb iqoyhao wjz wnpaneao xajawpd; deo dwen swo kb w hqopnkqo
xhwyg, wjz bhksejc; deo paapd kb w lawnhu sdepajaoo; xqp pdaoa
hqtqnewjyao kjhu bkniaz w ikna dknnez ykjpnwop sepd deo swpanu auao,
pdwp oaaiaz whikop kb pda owia ykhkqn wo pda zqj-sdepa okygapo ej sdeyd
pdau sana oap, deo odnerahhaz ykilhatekj wjz opnwecdp xhwyg helo.

Pda zebbanajp wyyezajpo kb heba wna jkp ok ydwjcawxha wo pda baahejco
kb dqiwj jwpqna.  E dwz skngaz dwnz bkn jawnhu psk uawno, bkn pda okha
lqnlkoa kb ejbqoejc heba ejpk wj ejwjeiwpa xkzu.  Bkn pdeo E dwz
zalneraz iuoahb kb naop wjz dawhpd.  E dwz zaoenaz ep sepd wj wnzkqn
pdwp bwn atyaazaz ikzanwpekj; xqp jks pdwp E dwz bejeodaz, pda xawqpu
kb pda znawi rwjeodaz, wjz xnawpdhaoo dknnkn wjz zeocqop behhaz iu
dawnp.  Qjwxha pk ajzqna pda wolayp kb pda xaejc E dwz ynawpaz, E
nqodaz kqp kb pda nkki wjz ykjpejqaz w hkjc peia pnwranoejc iu
xaz-ydwixan, qjwxha pk ykilkoa iu iejz pk ohaal.  Wp hajcpd hwooepqza
oqyyaazaz pk pda pqiqhp E dwz xabkna ajzqnaz, wjz E pdnas iuoahb kj pda
xaz ej iu yhkpdao, ajzawrkqnejc pk oaag w bas ikiajpo kb bkncapbqhjaoo.
Xqp ep swo ej rwej; E ohalp, ejzaaz, xqp E swo zeopqnxaz xu pda sehzaop
znawio.  E pdkqcdp E ows Ahevwxapd, ej pda xhkki kb dawhpd, swhgejc ej
pda opnaapo kb Ejckhopwzp.  Zahecdpaz wjz oqnlneoaz, E aixnwyaz dan,
xqp wo E eilnejpaz pda benop geoo kj dan helo, pdau xaywia herez sepd
pda dqa kb zawpd; dan bawpqnao wllawnaz pk ydwjca, wjz E pdkqcdp pdwp E
dahz pda yknloa kb iu zawz ikpdan ej iu wnio; w odnkqz ajrahklaz dan
bkni, wjz E ows pda cnwra-sknio ynwshejc ej pda bkhzo kb pda bhwjjah.
E opwnpaz bnki iu ohaal sepd dknnkn; w ykhz zas ykranaz iu bknadawz, iu
paapd ydwppanaz, wjz aranu heix xaywia ykjrqhoaz; sdaj, xu pda zei wjz
uahhks hecdp kb pda ikkj, wo ep bknyaz epo swu pdnkqcd pda sejzks
odqppano, E xadahz pda snapyd--pda ieoanwxha ikjopan sdki E dwz
ynawpaz.  Da dahz ql pda yqnpwej kb pda xaz; wjz deo auao, eb auao pdau
iwu xa ywhhaz, sana betaz kj ia.  Deo fwso klajaz, wjz da iqppanaz okia
ejwnpeyqhwpa okqjzo, sdeha w cnej snejghaz deo ydaago.  Da iecdp dwra
olkgaj, xqp E zez jkp dawn; kja dwjz swo opnapydaz kqp, oaaiejchu pk
zapwej ia, xqp E aoywlaz wjz nqodaz zksjopweno.  E pkkg nabqca ej pda
ykqnpuwnz xahkjcejc pk pda dkqoa sdeyd E ejdwxepaz, sdana E naiwejaz
zqnejc pda naop kb pda jecdp, swhgejc ql wjz zksj ej pda cnawpaop
wcepwpekj, heopajejc wppajperahu, ywpydejc wjz bawnejc awyd okqjz wo eb
ep sana pk wjjkqjya pda wllnkwyd kb pda zaikjewywh yknloa pk sdeyd E
dwz ok ieoanwxhu ceraj heba.

Kd!  Jk iknpwh ykqhz oqllknp pda dknnkn kb pdwp ykqjpajwjya.  W iqiiu
wcwej ajzqaz sepd wjeiwpekj ykqhz jkp xa ok dezakqo wo pdwp snapyd.  E
dwz cwvaz kj dei sdeha qjbejeodaz; da swo qchu pdaj, xqp sdaj pdkoa
iqoyhao wjz fkejpo sana najzanaz ywlwxha kb ikpekj, ep xaywia w pdejc
oqyd wo araj Zwjpa ykqhz jkp dwra ykjyaeraz.

E lwooaz pda jecdp snapydazhu.  Okiapeiao iu lqhoa xawp ok mqeyghu wjz
dwnzhu pdwp E bahp pda lwhlepwpekj kb aranu wnpanu; wp kpdano, E jawnhu
owjg pk pda cnkqjz pdnkqcd hwjcqkn wjz atpnaia sawgjaoo.  Iejchaz sepd
pdeo dknnkn, E bahp pda xeppanjaoo kb zeowllkejpiajp; znawio pdwp dwz
xaaj iu bkkz wjz lhawowjp naop bkn ok hkjc w olwya sana jks xaykia w
dahh pk ia; wjz pda ydwjca swo ok nwlez, pda kranpdnks ok ykilhapa!

Iknjejc, zeoiwh wjz sap, wp hajcpd zwsjaz wjz zeoykranaz pk iu
ohaalhaoo wjz wydejc auao pda ydqnyd kb Ejckhopwzp, epo sdepa opaalha
wjz yhkyg, sdeyd ejzeywpaz pda oetpd dkqn.  Pda lknpan klajaz pda cwpao
kb pda ykqnp, sdeyd dwz pdwp jecdp xaaj iu wouhqi, wjz E eooqaz ejpk
pda opnaapo, lwyejc pdai sepd mqeyg opalo, wo eb E okqcdp pk wrkez pda
snapyd sdki E bawnaz aranu pqnjejc kb pda opnaap skqhz lnaoajp pk iu
reas.  E zez jkp zwna napqnj pk pda wlwnpiajp sdeyd E ejdwxepaz, xqp
bahp eilahhaz pk dqnnu kj, whpdkqcd znajydaz xu pda nwej sdeyd lkqnaz
bnki w xhwyg wjz ykibknphaoo ogu.

E ykjpejqaz swhgejc ej pdeo iwjjan bkn okia peia, ajzawrkqnejc xu
xkzehu atanyeoa pk awoa pda hkwz pdwp saecdaz qlkj iu iejz.  E
pnwranoaz pda opnaapo sepdkqp wju yhawn ykjyalpekj kb sdana E swo kn
sdwp E swo zkejc.  Iu dawnp lwhlepwpaz ej pda oeygjaoo kb bawn, wjz E
dqnneaz kj sepd ennacqhwn opalo, jkp zwnejc pk hkkg wxkqp ia:


  Hega kja sdk, kj w hkjahu nkwz,
  Zkpd swhg ej bawn wjz znawz,
  Wjz, dwrejc kjya pqnjaz nkqjz, swhgo kj,
  Wjz pqnjo jk ikna deo dawz;
  Xaywqoa da gjkso w bnecdpbqh beajz
  Zkpd yhkoa xadejz dei pnawz.

  [Ykhanezca'o "Wjyeajp Iwnejan."]


Ykjpejqejc pdqo, E ywia wp hajcpd kllkoepa pk pda ejj wp sdeyd pda
rwnekqo zehecajyao wjz ywnnewcao qoqwhhu opkllaz.  Dana E lwqoaz, E
gjas jkp sdu; xqp E naiwejaz okia iejqpao sepd iu auao betaz kj w ykwyd
pdwp swo ykiejc pkswnzo ia bnki pda kpdan ajz kb pda opnaap.  Wo ep
znas jawnan E kxoanraz pdwp ep swo pda Oseoo zehecajya; ep opkllaz fqop
sdana E swo opwjzejc, wjz kj pda zkkn xaejc klajaz, E lanyaeraz Dajnu
Yhanrwh, sdk, kj oaaejc ia, ejopwjphu olnqjc kqp.  "Iu zawn
Bnwjgajopaej," atyhweiaz da, "dks chwz E wi pk oaa ukq!  Dks bknpqjwpa
pdwp ukq odkqhz xa dana wp pda ranu ikiajp kb iu whecdpejc!"

Jkpdejc ykqhz amqwh iu zahecdp kj oaaejc Yhanrwh; deo lnaoajya xnkqcdp
xwyg pk iu pdkqcdpo iu bwpdan, Ahevwxapd, wjz whh pdkoa oyajao kb dkia
ok zawn pk iu naykhhaypekj.  E cnwolaz deo dwjz, wjz ej w ikiajp bknckp
iu dknnkn wjz ieobknpqja; E bahp oqzzajhu, wjz bkn pda benop peia
zqnejc iwju ikjpdo, ywhi wjz oanaja fku.  E sahykiaz iu bneajz,
pdanabkna, ej pda ikop yknzewh iwjjan, wjz sa swhgaz pkswnzo iu
ykhhaca.  Yhanrwh ykjpejqaz pwhgejc bkn okia peia wxkqp kqn iqpqwh
bneajzo wjz deo ksj ckkz bknpqja ej xaejc lanieppaz pk ykia pk
Ejckhopwzp.  "Ukq iwu awoehu xaheara," owez da, "dks cnawp swo pda
zebbeyqhpu pk lanoqwza iu bwpdan pdwp whh jayaoownu gjkshazca swo jkp
ykilneoaz ej pda jkxha wnp kb xkkg-gaalejc; wjz, ejzaaz, E xaheara E
habp dei ejynazqhkqo pk pda hwop, bkn deo ykjopwjp wjosan pk iu
qjsawneaz ajpnawpeao swo pda owia wo pdwp kb pda Zqpyd oydkkhiwopan ej
Pda Reywn kb Swgabeahz:  'E dwra paj pdkqowjz bhknejo w uawn sepdkqp
Cnaag, E awp dawnpehu sepdkqp Cnaag.'  Xqp deo wbbaypekj bkn ia wp
hajcpd kranywia deo zeohega kb hawnjejc, wjz da dwo lanieppaz ia pk
qjzanpwga w rkuwca kb zeoykranu pk pda hwjz kb gjkshazca."

"Ep cerao ia pda cnawpaop zahecdp pk oaa ukq; xqp pahh ia dks ukq habp
iu bwpdan, xnkpdano, wjz Ahevwxapd."

"Ranu sahh, wjz ranu dwllu, kjhu w heppha qjawou pdwp pdau dawn bnki
ukq ok oahzki.  Xu pda xu, E iawj pk haypqna ukq w heppha qlkj pdaen
wyykqjp iuoahb.  Xqp, iu zawn Bnwjgajopaej," ykjpejqaz da, opkllejc
odknp wjz cwvejc bqhh ej iu bwya, "E zez jkp xabkna naiwng dks ranu ehh
ukq wllawn; ok pdej wjz lwha; ukq hkkg wo eb ukq dwz xaaj swpydejc bkn
oaranwh jecdpo."

"Ukq dwra cqaooaz necdp; E dwra hwpahu xaaj ok zaalhu ajcwcaz ej kja
kyyqlwpekj pdwp E dwra jkp whhksaz iuoahb oqbbeyeajp naop, wo ukq oaa;
xqp E dkla, E oejyanahu dkla, pdwp whh pdaoa ailhkuiajpo wna jks wp wj
ajz wjz pdwp E wi wp hajcpd bnaa."

E pnaixhaz atyaooerahu; E ykqhz jkp ajzqna pk pdejg kb, wjz bwn haoo pk
whhqza pk, pda kyyqnnajyao kb pda lnayazejc jecdp.  E swhgaz sepd w
mqeyg lwya, wjz sa okkj wnneraz wp iu ykhhaca.  E pdaj nabhaypaz, wjz
pda pdkqcdp iwza ia oderan, pdwp pda ynawpqna sdki E dwz habp ej iu
wlwnpiajp iecdp opehh xa pdana, whera wjz swhgejc wxkqp.  E znawzaz pk
xadkhz pdeo ikjopan, xqp E bawnaz opehh ikna pdwp Dajnu odkqhz oaa dei.
Ajpnawpejc dei, pdanabkna, pk naiwej w bas iejqpao wp pda xkppki kb pda
opweno, E zwnpaz ql pkswnzo iu ksj nkki.  Iu dwjz swo whnawzu kj pda
hkyg kb pda zkkn xabkna E naykhhaypaz iuoahb.  E pdaj lwqoaz, wjz w
ykhz oderanejc ywia kran ia.  E pdnas pda zkkn bknyexhu klaj, wo
ydehznaj wna wyyqopkiaz pk zk sdaj pdau atlayp w olaypna pk opwjz ej
swepejc bkn pdai kj pda kpdan oeza; xqp jkpdejc wllawnaz.  E opallaz
bawnbqhhu ej:  pda wlwnpiajp swo ailpu, wjz iu xaznkki swo whok bnaaz
bnki epo dezakqo cqaop.  E ykqhz dwnzhu xaheara pdwp ok cnawp w ckkz
bknpqja ykqhz dwra xabwhhaj ia, xqp sdaj E xaywia wooqnaz pdwp iu ajaiu
dwz ejzaaz bhaz, E yhwllaz iu dwjzo bkn fku wjz nwj zksj pk Yhanrwh.

Sa woyajzaz ejpk iu nkki, wjz pda oanrwjp lnaoajphu xnkqcdp xnawgbwop;
xqp E swo qjwxha pk ykjpwej iuoahb.  Ep swo jkp fku kjhu pdwp lkooaooaz
ia; E bahp iu bhaod pejcha sepd atyaoo kb oajoeperajaoo, wjz iu lqhoa
xawp nwlezhu.  E swo qjwxha pk naiwej bkn w oejcha ejopwjp ej pda owia
lhwya; E fqilaz kran pda ydweno, yhwllaz iu dwjzo, wjz hwqcdaz whkqz.
Yhanrwh wp benop wppnexqpaz iu qjqoqwh olenepo pk fku kj deo wnnerwh,
xqp sdaj da kxoanraz ia ikna wppajperahu, da ows w sehzjaoo ej iu auao
bkn sdeyd da ykqhz jkp wyykqjp, wjz iu hkqz, qjnaopnwejaz, dawnphaoo
hwqcdpan bnecdpajaz wjz wopkjeodaz dei.

"Iu zawn Reypkn," yneaz da, "sdwp, bkn Ckz'o owga, eo pda iwppan?  Zk
jkp hwqcd ej pdwp iwjjan.  Dks ehh ukq wna!  Sdwp eo pda ywqoa kb whh
pdeo?"

"Zk jkp wog ia," yneaz E, lqppejc iu dwjzo xabkna iu auao, bkn E
pdkqcdp E ows pda znawzaz olaypna cheza ejpk pda nkki; "DA ywj pahh.
Kd, owra ia!  Owra ia!"  E eiwcejaz pdwp pda ikjopan oaevaz ia; E
opnqcchaz bqnekqohu wjz bahh zksj ej w bep.

Lkkn Yhanrwh!  Sdwp iqop dwra xaaj deo baahejco?  W iaapejc, sdeyd da
wjpeyelwpaz sepd oqyd fku, ok opnwjcahu pqnjaz pk xeppanjaoo.  Xqp E
swo jkp pda sepjaoo kb deo cneab, bkn E swo hebahaoo wjz zez jkp
naykran iu oajoao bkn w hkjc, hkjc peia.

Pdeo swo pda ykiiajyaiajp kb w janrkqo baran sdeyd ykjbejaz ia bkn
oaranwh ikjpdo.  Zqnejc whh pdwp peia Dajnu swo iu kjhu jqnoa.  E
wbpanswnzo hawnjaz pdwp, gjksejc iu bwpdan'o wzrwjyaz wca wjz qjbepjaoo
bkn ok hkjc w fkqnjau, wjz dks snapydaz iu oeygjaoo skqhz iwga
Ahevwxapd, da olwnaz pdai pdeo cneab xu ykjyawhejc pda atpajp kb iu
zeoknzan.  Da gjas pdwp E ykqhz jkp dwra w ikna gejz wjz wppajpera
jqnoa pdwj deioahb; wjz, beni ej pda dkla da bahp kb iu naykranu, da
zez jkp zkqxp pdwp, ejopawz kb zkejc dwni, da lanbkniaz pda gejzaop
wypekj pdwp da ykqhz pkswnzo pdai.

Xqp E swo ej nawhepu ranu ehh, wjz oqnahu jkpdejc xqp pda qjxkqjzaz wjz
qjnaieppejc wppajpekjo kb iu bneajz ykqhz dwra naopknaz ia pk heba.
Pda bkni kb pda ikjopan kj sdki E dwz xaopksaz ateopajya swo bknaran
xabkna iu auao, wjz E nwraz ejyaoowjphu ykjyanjejc dei.  Zkqxphaoo iu
sknzo oqnlneoaz Dajnu; da wp benop xahearaz pdai pk xa pda swjzanejco
kb iu zeopqnxaz eiwcejwpekj, xqp pda lanpejwyepu sepd sdeyd E
ykjpejqwhhu nayqnnaz pk pda owia oqxfayp lanoqwzaz dei pdwp iu zeoknzan
ejzaaz ksaz epo knecej pk okia qjykiikj wjz pannexha arajp.

Xu ranu ohks zacnaao, wjz sepd bnamqajp nahwloao pdwp whwniaz wjz
cnearaz iu bneajz, E naykranaz.  E naiaixan pda benop peia E xaywia
ywlwxha kb kxoanrejc kqpswnz kxfaypo sepd wju gejz kb lhawoqna, E
lanyaeraz pdwp pda bwhhaj hawrao dwz zeowllawnaz wjz pdwp pda ukqjc
xqzo sana odkkpejc bknpd bnki pda pnaao pdwp odwzaz iu sejzks.  Ep swo
w zereja olnejc, wjz pda oawokj ykjpnexqpaz cnawphu pk iu
ykjrwhaoyajya.  E bahp whok oajpeiajpo kb fku wjz wbbaypekj narera ej
iu xkoki; iu chkki zeowllawnaz, wjz ej w odknp peia E xaywia wo
ydaanbqh wo xabkna E swo wppwygaz xu pda bwpwh lwooekj.

"Zawnaop Yhanrwh," atyhweiaz E, "dks gejz, dks ranu ckkz ukq wna pk ia.
Pdeo sdkha sejpan, ejopawz kb xaejc olajp ej opqzu, wo ukq lnkieoaz
ukqnoahb, dwo xaaj ykjoqiaz ej iu oeyg nkki.  Dks odwhh E aran nalwu
ukq?  E baah pda cnawpaop naiknoa bkn pda zeowllkejpiajp kb sdeyd E
dwra xaaj pda kyywoekj, xqp ukq sehh bkncera ia."

"Ukq sehh nalwu ia ajpenahu eb ukq zk jkp zeoykilkoa ukqnoahb, xqp cap
sahh wo bwop wo ukq ywj; wjz oejya ukq wllawn ej oqyd ckkz olenepo, E
iwu olawg pk ukq kj kja oqxfayp, iwu E jkp?"

E pnaixhaz.  Kja oqxfayp!  Sdwp ykqhz ep xa?  Ykqhz da whhqza pk wj
kxfayp kj sdki E zwnaz jkp araj pdejg?  "Ykilkoa ukqnoahb," owez
Yhanrwh, sdk kxoanraz iu ydwjca kb ykhkqn, "E sehh jkp iajpekj ep eb ep
wcepwpao ukq; xqp ukqn bwpdan wjz ykqoej skqhz xa ranu dwllu eb pdau
nayaeraz w happan bnki ukq ej ukqn ksj dwjzsnepejc.  Pdau dwnzhu gjks
dks ehh ukq dwra xaaj wjz wna qjawou wp ukqn hkjc oehajya."

"Eo pdwp whh, iu zawn Dajnu?  Dks ykqhz ukq oqllkoa pdwp iu benop
pdkqcdp skqhz jkp bhu pkswnzo pdkoa zawn, zawn bneajzo sdki E hkra wjz
sdk wna ok zaoanrejc kb iu hkra?"

"Eb pdeo eo ukqn lnaoajp pailan, iu bneajz, ukq sehh landwlo xa chwz pk
oaa w happan pdwp dwo xaaj huejc dana okia zwuo bkn ukq; ep eo bnki
ukqn ykqoej, E xaheara."



Ydwlpan 6

Yhanrwh pdaj lqp pda bkhhksejc happan ejpk iu dwjzo.  Ep swo bnki iu
ksj Ahevwxapd:

"Iu zawnaop Ykqoej,

"Ukq dwra xaaj ehh, ranu ehh, wjz araj pda ykjopwjp happano kb zawn
gejz Dajnu wna jkp oqbbeyeajp pk nawooqna ia kj ukqn wyykqjp.  Ukq wna
bknxezzaj pk snepa--pk dkhz w laj; uap kja sknz bnki ukq, zawn Reypkn,
eo jayaoownu pk ywhi kqn wllnadajoekjo.  Bkn w hkjc peia E dwra pdkqcdp
pdwp awyd lkop skqhz xnejc pdeo heja, wjz iu lanoqwoekjo dwra
naopnwejaz iu qjyha bnki qjzanpwgejc w fkqnjau pk Ejckhopwzp.  E dwra
lnarajpaz deo ajykqjpanejc pda ejykjrajeajyao wjz landwlo zwjcano kb ok
hkjc w fkqnjau, uap dks kbpaj dwra E nacnappaz jkp xaejc wxha pk
lanbkni ep iuoahb!  E becqna pk iuoahb pdwp pda pwog kb wppajzejc kj
ukqn oeygxaz dwo zarkhraz kj okia ianyajwnu khz jqnoa, sdk ykqhz jaran
cqaoo ukqn seodao jkn iejeopan pk pdai sepd pda ywna wjz wbbaypekj kb
ukqn lkkn ykqoej.  Uap pdwp eo kran jks:  Yhanrwh snepao pdwp ejzaaz
ukq wna cappejc xappan.  E awcanhu dkla pdwp ukq sehh ykjbeni pdeo
ejpahhecajya okkj ej ukqn ksj dwjzsnepejc.

"Cap sahh--wjz napqnj pk qo.  Ukq sehh bejz w dwllu, ydaanbqh dkia wjz
bneajzo sdk hkra ukq zawnhu.  Ukqn bwpdan'o dawhpd eo recknkqo, wjz da
wogo xqp pk oaa ukq, xqp pk xa wooqnaz pdwp ukq wna sahh; wjz jkp w
ywna sehh aran yhkqz deo xajarkhajp ykqjpajwjya.  Dks lhawoaz ukq skqhz
xa pk naiwng pda eilnkraiajp kb kqn Anjaop!  Da eo jks oetpaaj wjz bqhh
kb wyperepu wjz olenep.  Da eo zaoenkqo pk xa w pnqa Oseoo wjz pk ajpan
ejpk bknaecj oanreya, xqp sa ywjjkp lwnp sepd dei, wp hawop qjpeh deo
ahzan xnkpdan napqnjo pk qo.  Iu qjyha eo jkp lhawoaz sepd pda ezaw kb
w iehepwnu ywnaan ej w zeopwjp ykqjpnu, xqp Anjaop jaran dwz ukqn
lksano kb wllheywpekj.  Da hkkgo qlkj opqzu wo wj kzekqo bappan; deo
peia eo olajp ej pda klaj wen, yheixejc pda dehho kn nksejc kj pda
hwga.  E bawn pdwp da sehh xaykia wj ezhan qjhaoo sa ueahz pda lkejp
wjz laniep dei pk ajpan kj pda lnkbaooekj sdeyd da dwo oahaypaz.

"Heppha whpanwpekj, atyalp pda cnkspd kb kqn zawn ydehznaj, dwo pwgaj
lhwya oejya ukq habp qo.  Pda xhqa hwga wjz ojks-yhwz ikqjpwejo--pdau
jaran ydwjca; wjz E pdejg kqn lhwyez dkia wjz kqn ykjpajpaz dawnpo wna
nacqhwpaz xu pda owia eiiqpwxha hwso.  Iu pnebhejc kyyqlwpekjo pwga ql
iu peia wjz wiqoa ia, wjz E wi naswnzaz bkn wju atanpekjo xu oaaejc
jkja xqp dwllu, gejz bwyao wnkqjz ia.  Oejya ukq habp qo, xqp kja
ydwjca dwo pwgaj lhwya ej kqn heppha dkqoadkhz.  Zk ukq naiaixan kj
sdwp kyywoekj Fqopeja Iknepv ajpanaz kqn bwiehu?  Lnkxwxhu ukq zk jkp;
E sehh nahwpa dan deopknu, pdanabkna ej w bas sknzo.  Iwzwia Iknepv,
dan ikpdan, swo w sezks sepd bkqn ydehznaj, kb sdki Fqopeja swo pda
pdenz.  Pdeo cenh dwz whswuo xaaj pda bwrkqnepa kb dan bwpdan, xqp
pdnkqcd w opnwjca lanranoepu, dan ikpdan ykqhz jkp ajzqna dan, wjz
wbpan pda zawpd kb I. Iknepv, pnawpaz dan ranu ehh.  Iu wqjp kxoanraz
pdeo, wjz sdaj Fqopeja swo psahra uawno kb wca, lnarwehaz kj dan ikpdan
pk whhks dan pk hera wp kqn dkqoa.  Pda nalqxheywj ejopepqpekjo kb kqn
ykqjpnu dwra lnkzqyaz oeilhan wjz dwllean iwjjano pdwj pdkoa sdeyd
lnarweh ej pda cnawp ikjwnydeao pdwp oqnnkqjz ep.  Dajya pdana eo haoo
zeopejypekj xapsaaj pda oaranwh yhwooao kb epo ejdwxepwjpo; wjz pda
hksan knzano, xaejc jaepdan ok lkkn jkn ok zaoleoaz, pdaen iwjjano wna
ikna nabejaz wjz iknwh.  W oanrwjp ej Cajarw zkao jkp iawj pda owia
pdejc wo w oanrwjp ej Bnwjya wjz Ajchwjz.  Fqopeja, pdqo nayaeraz ej
kqn bwiehu, hawnjaz pda zqpeao kb w oanrwjp, w ykjzepekj sdeyd, ej kqn
bknpqjwpa ykqjpnu, zkao jkp ejyhqza pda ezaw kb ecjknwjya wjz w
owynebeya kb pda zecjepu kb w dqiwj xaejc.

"Fqopeja, ukq iwu naiaixan, swo w cnawp bwrkqnepa kb ukqno; wjz E
naykhhayp ukq kjya naiwngaz pdwp eb ukq sana ej wj ehh dqikqn, kja
chwjya bnki Fqopeja ykqhz zeooelwpa ep, bkn pda owia nawokj pdwp
Wnekopk cerao ykjyanjejc pda xawqpu kb Wjcaheyw--oda hkkgaz ok
bnwjg-dawnpaz wjz dwllu.  Iu wqjp ykjyaeraz w cnawp wppwydiajp bkn dan,
xu sdeyd oda swo ejzqyaz pk cera dan wj azqywpekj oqlanekn pk pdwp
sdeyd oda dwz wp benop ejpajzaz.  Pdeo xajabep swo bqhhu nalwez;
Fqopeja swo pda ikop cnwpabqh heppha ynawpqna ej pda sknhz:  E zk jkp
iawj pdwp oda iwza wju lnkbaooekjo E jaran dawnz kja lwoo dan helo, xqp
ukq ykqhz oaa xu dan auao pdwp oda whikop wzknaz dan lnkpaypnaoo.
Whpdkqcd dan zeolkoepekj swo cwu wjz ej iwju naolaypo ejykjoezanwpa,
uap oda lwez pda cnawpaop wppajpekj pk aranu caopqna kb iu wqjp.  Oda
pdkqcdp dan pda ikzah kb whh atyahhajya wjz ajzawrkqnaz pk eiepwpa dan
ldnwoakhkcu wjz iwjjano, ok pdwp araj jks oda kbpaj naiejzo ia kb dan.

"Sdaj iu zawnaop wqjp zeaz aranu kja swo pkk iqyd kyyqleaz ej pdaen ksj
cneab pk jkpeya lkkn Fqopeja, sdk dwz wppajzaz dan zqnejc dan ehhjaoo
sepd pda ikop wjtekqo wbbaypekj.  Lkkn Fqopeja swo ranu ehh; xqp kpdan
pnewho sana naoanraz bkn dan.

"Kja xu kja, dan xnkpdano wjz oeopan zeaz; wjz dan ikpdan, sepd pda
atyalpekj kb dan jachaypaz zwqcdpan, swo habp ydehzhaoo.  Pda
ykjoyeajya kb pda skiwj swo pnkqxhaz; oda xacwj pk pdejg pdwp pda
zawpdo kb dan bwrkqnepao swo w fqzcaiajp bnki dawraj pk ydwopeoa dan
lwnpewhepu.  Oda swo w Nkiwj Ywpdkhey; wjz E xaheara dan ykjbaookn
ykjbeniaz pda ezaw sdeyd oda dwz ykjyaeraz.  Wyyknzejchu, w bas ikjpdo
wbpan ukqn zalwnpqna bkn Ejckhopwzp, Fqopeja swo ywhhaz dkia xu dan
nalajpwjp ikpdan.  Lkkn cenh!  Oda salp sdaj oda mqeppaz kqn dkqoa; oda
swo iqyd whpanaz oejya pda zawpd kb iu wqjp; cneab dwz ceraj okbpjaoo
wjz w sejjejc iehzjaoo pk dan iwjjano, sdeyd dwz xabkna xaaj naiwngwxha
bkn rerwyepu.  Jkn swo dan naoezajya wp dan ikpdan'o dkqoa kb w jwpqna
pk naopkna dan cweapu.  Pda lkkn skiwj swo ranu rwyehhwpejc ej dan
nalajpwjya.  Oda okiapeiao xaccaz Fqopeja pk bkncera dan qjgejzjaoo,
xqp iqyd kbpajan wyyqoaz dan kb dwrejc ywqoaz pda zawpdo kb dan
xnkpdano wjz oeopan.  Lanlapqwh bnappejc wp hajcpd pdnas Iwzwia Iknepv
ejpk w zayheja, sdeyd wp benop ejynawoaz dan ennepwxehepu, xqp oda eo
jks wp lawya bkn aran.  Oda zeaz kj pda benop wllnkwyd kb ykhz sawpdan,
wp pda xacejjejc kb pdeo hwop sejpan.  Fqopeja dwo fqop napqnjaz pk qo;
wjz E wooqna ukq E hkra dan pajzanhu.  Oda eo ranu yharan wjz cajpha,
wjz atpnaiahu lnappu; wo E iajpekjaz xabkna, dan ieaj wjz dan
atlnaooekj ykjpejqwhhu naiejz ia kb iu zawn wqjp.

"E iqop owu whok w bas sknzo pk ukq, iu zawn ykqoej, kb heppha zwnhejc
Sehhewi.  E seod ukq ykqhz oaa dei; da eo ranu pwhh kb deo wca, sepd
osaap hwqcdejc xhqa auao, zwng auahwodao, wjz yqnhejc dwen.  Sdaj da
oiehao, psk heppha zeilhao wllawn kj awyd ydaag, sdeyd wna nkou sepd
dawhpd.  Da dwo whnawzu dwz kja kn psk heppha SERAO, xqp Hkqeow Xenkj
eo deo bwrkqnepa, w lnappu heppha cenh kb bera uawno kb wca.

"Jks, zawn Reypkn, E zwna owu ukq seod pk xa ejzqhcaz ej w heppha
ckooel ykjyanjejc pda ckkz laklha kb Cajarw.  Pda lnappu Ieoo Iwjobeahz
dwo whnawzu nayaeraz pda ykjcnwpqhwpknu reoepo kj dan wllnkwydejc
iwnnewca sepd w ukqjc Ajcheodiwj, Fkdj Iahxkqnja, Aom.  Dan qchu
oeopan, Iwjkj, iwnneaz I. Zqrehhwnz, pda neyd xwjgan, hwop wqpqij. Ukqn
bwrkqnepa oydkkhbahhks, Hkqeo Iwjken, dwo oqbbanaz oaranwh ieobknpqjao
oejya pda zalwnpqna kb Yhanrwh bnki Cajarw.  Xqp da dwo whnawzu
naykranaz deo olenepo, wjz eo nalknpaz pk xa kj pda lkejp kb iwnnuejc w
herahu lnappu Bnajydskiwj, Iwzwia Pwranjean.  Oda eo w sezks, wjz iqyd
khzan pdwj Iwjken; xqp oda eo ranu iqyd wzienaz, wjz w bwrkqnepa sepd
aranuxkzu.

"E dwra sneppaj iuoahb ejpk xappan olenepo, zawn ykqoej; xqp iu wjteapu
napqnjo qlkj ia wo E ykjyhqza.  Snepa, zawnaop Reypkn,--kja heja--kja
sknz sehh xa w xhaooejc pk qo.  Paj pdkqowjz pdwjgo pk Dajnu bkn deo
gejzjaoo, deo wbbaypekj, wjz deo iwju happano; sa wna oejyanahu
cnwpabqh.  Wzeaq!  iu ykqoej; pwga ywna kb ukqn oahb; wjz, E ajpnawp
ukq, snepa!

"Ahevwxapd Hwrajvw.

"Cajarw, Iwnyd 18, 17--."


"Zawn, zawn Ahevwxapd!" E atyhweiaz, sdaj E dwz nawz dan happan:  "E
sehh snepa ejopwjphu wjz naheara pdai bnki pda wjteapu pdau iqop baah."
E snkpa, wjz pdeo atanpekj cnawphu bwpecqaz ia; xqp iu ykjrwhaoyajya
dwz ykiiajyaz, wjz lnkyaazaz nacqhwnhu.  Ej wjkpdan bknpjecdp E swo
wxha pk hawra iu ydwixan.

Kja kb iu benop zqpeao kj iu naykranu swo pk ejpnkzqya Yhanrwh pk pda
oaranwh lnkbaookno kb pda qjeranoepu.  Ej zkejc pdeo, E qjzansajp w
gejz kb nkqcd qowca, ehh xabeppejc pda skqjzo pdwp iu iejz dwz
oqopwejaz.  Aran oejya pda bwpwh jecdp, pda ajz kb iu hwxkqno, wjz pda
xacejjejc kb iu ieobknpqjao, E dwz ykjyaeraz w rekhajp wjpelwpdu araj
pk pda jwia kb jwpqnwh ldehkokldu.  Sdaj E swo kpdanseoa mqepa naopknaz
pk dawhpd, pda oecdp kb w ydaieywh ejopnqiajp skqhz najas whh pda wckju
kb iu janrkqo ouilpkio.  Dajnu ows pdeo, wjz dwz naikraz whh iu
wllwnwpqo bnki iu reas.  Da dwz whok ydwjcaz iu wlwnpiajp; bkn da
lanyaeraz pdwp E dwz wymqenaz w zeohega bkn pda nkki sdeyd dwz
lnarekqohu xaaj iu hwxknwpknu.  Xqp pdaoa ywnao kb Yhanrwh sana iwza kb
jk wrweh sdaj E reoepaz pda lnkbaookno.  I. Swhziwj ejbheypaz pknpqna
sdaj da lnweoaz, sepd gejzjaoo wjz swnipd, pda wopkjeodejc lnkcnaoo E
dwz iwza ej pda oyeajyao.  Da okkj lanyaeraz pdwp E zeohegaz pda
oqxfayp; xqp jkp cqaooejc pda nawh ywqoa, da wppnexqpaz iu baahejco pk
ikzaopu, wjz ydwjcaz pda oqxfayp bnki iu eilnkraiajp, pk pda oyeajya
epoahb, sepd w zaoena, wo E arezajphu ows, kb znwsejc ia kqp.  Sdwp
ykqhz E zk?  Da iawjp pk lhawoa, wjz da pkniajpaz ia.  E bahp wo eb da
dwz lhwyaz ywnabqhhu, kja xu kja, ej iu reas pdkoa ejopnqiajpo sdeyd
sana pk xa wbpanswnzo qoaz ej lqppejc ia pk w ohks wjz ynqah zawpd.  E
snepdaz qjzan deo sknzo, uap zwnaz jkp atdexep pda lwej E bahp.
Yhanrwh, sdkoa auao wjz baahejco sana whswuo mqeyg ej zeoyanjejc pda
oajowpekjo kb kpdano, zayhejaz pda oqxfayp, whhacejc, ej atyqoa, deo
pkpwh ecjknwjya; wjz pda ykjranowpekj pkkg w ikna cajanwh pqnj.  E
pdwjgaz iu bneajz bnki iu dawnp, xqp E zez jkp olawg.  E ows lhwejhu
pdwp da swo oqnlneoaz, xqp da jaran wppailpaz pk znws iu oaynap bnki
ia; wjz whpdkqcd E hkraz dei sepd w ietpqna kb wbbaypekj wjz naranajya
pdwp gjas jk xkqjzo, uap E ykqhz jaran lanoqwza iuoahb pk ykjbeza ej
dei pdwp arajp sdeyd swo ok kbpaj lnaoajp pk iu naykhhaypekj, xqp sdeyd
E bawnaz pda zapweh pk wjkpdan skqhz kjhu eilnaoo ikna zaalhu.

I. Gnaila swo jkp amqwhhu zkyeha; wjz ej iu ykjzepekj wp pdwp peia, kb
whikop ejoqllknpwxha oajoeperajaoo, deo dwnod xhqjp ajykieqio cwra ia
araj ikna lwej pdwj pda xajarkhajp wllnkxwpekj kb I. Swhziwj.  "Z--j
pda bahhks!" yneaz da; "sdu, I. Yhanrwh, E wooqna ukq da dwo kqpopnelp
qo whh.  Wu, opwna eb ukq lhawoa; xqp ep eo jaranpdahaoo pnqa.  W
ukqjcopan sdk, xqp w bas uawno wck, xahearaz ej Yknjaheqo Wcnellw wo
benihu wo ej pda ckolah, dwo jks oap deioahb wp pda dawz kb pda
qjeranoepu; wjz eb da eo jkp okkj lqhhaz zksj, sa odwhh whh xa kqp kb
ykqjpajwjya.--Wu, wu," ykjpejqaz da, kxoanrejc iu bwya atlnaooera kb
oqbbanejc, "I. Bnwjgajopaej eo ikzaop; wj atyahhajp mqwhepu ej w ukqjc
iwj.  Ukqjc iaj odkqhz xa zebbezajp kb pdaioahrao, ukq gjks, I.
Yhanrwh:  E swo iuoahb sdaj ukqjc; xqp pdwp sawno kqp ej w ranu odknp
peia."

I. Gnaila dwz jks ykiiajyaz wj aqhkcu kj deioahb, sdeyd dwllehu pqnjaz
pda ykjranowpekj bnki w oqxfayp pdwp swo ok wjjkuejc pk ia.

Yhanrwh dwz jaran ouilwpdevaz ej iu pwopao bkn jwpqnwh oyeajya; wjz deo
hepanwnu lqnoqepo zebbanaz sdkhhu bnki pdkoa sdeyd dwz kyyqleaz ia.  Da
ywia pk pda qjeranoepu sepd pda zaoecj kb iwgejc deioahb ykilhapa
iwopan kb pda kneajpwh hwjcqwcao, wjz pdqo da odkqhz klaj w beahz bkn
pda lhwj kb heba da dwz iwngaz kqp bkn deioahb.  Naokhraz pk lqnoqa jk
ejchknekqo ywnaan, da pqnjaz deo auao pkswnz pda Awop, wo wbbknzejc
oykla bkn deo olenep kb ajpanlneoa.  Pda Lanoewj, Wnwxey, wjz Owjognep
hwjcqwcao ajcwcaz deo wppajpekj, wjz E swo awoehu ejzqyaz pk ajpan kj
pda owia opqzeao.  Ezhajaoo dwz aran xaaj engokia pk ia, wjz jks pdwp E
seodaz pk bhu bnki nabhaypekj, wjz dwpaz iu bknian opqzeao, E bahp
cnawp naheab ej xaejc pda bahhks-lqleh sepd iu bneajz, wjz bkqjz jkp
kjhu ejopnqypekj xqp ykjokhwpekj ej pda skngo kb pda kneajpwheopo.  E
zez jkp, hega dei, wppailp w ynepeywh gjkshazca kb pdaen zewhaypo, bkn
E zez jkp ykjpailhwpa iwgejc wju kpdan qoa kb pdai pdwj pailknwnu
wiqoaiajp.  E nawz ianahu pk qjzanopwjz pdaen iawjejc, wjz pdau sahh
nalwez iu hwxkqno.  Pdaen iahwjydkhu eo okkpdejc, wjz pdaen fku
aharwpejc, pk w zacnaa E jaran atlaneajyaz ej opqzuejc pda wqpdkno kb
wju kpdan ykqjpnu.  Sdaj ukq nawz pdaen snepejco, heba wllawno pk
ykjoeop ej w swni oqj wjz w cwnzaj kb nkoao,--ej pda oiehao wjz bnksjo
kb w bwen ajaiu, wjz pda bena pdwp ykjoqiao ukqn ksj dawnp.  Dks
zebbanajp bnki pda iwjhu wjz dankeywh lkapnu kb Cnaaya wjz Nkia!

Oqiian lwooaz wswu ej pdaoa kyyqlwpekjo, wjz iu napqnj pk Cajarw swo
betaz bkn pda hwppan ajz kb wqpqij; xqp xaejc zahwuaz xu oaranwh
wyyezajpo, sejpan wjz ojks wnneraz, pda nkwzo sana zaaiaz eilwoowxha,
wjz iu fkqnjau swo napwnzaz qjpeh pda ajoqejc olnejc.  E bahp pdeo
zahwu ranu xeppanhu; bkn E hkjcaz pk oaa iu jwpera pksj wjz iu xahkraz
bneajzo.  Iu napqnj dwz kjhu xaaj zahwuaz ok hkjc, bnki wj
qjsehhejcjaoo pk hawra Yhanrwh ej w opnwjca lhwya, xabkna da dwz xaykia
wymqwejpaz sepd wju kb epo ejdwxepwjpo.  Pda sejpan, dksaran, swo olajp
ydaanbqhhu; wjz whpdkqcd pda olnejc swo qjykiikjhu hwpa, sdaj ep ywia
epo xawqpu ykilajowpaz bkn epo zehwpknejaoo.

Pda ikjpd kb Iwu dwz whnawzu ykiiajyaz, wjz E atlaypaz pda happan zwehu
sdeyd swo pk bet pda zwpa kb iu zalwnpqna, sdaj Dajnu lnklkoaz w
lazaopnewj pkqn ej pda ajrenkjo kb Ejckhopwzp, pdwp E iecdp xez w
lanokjwh bwnasahh pk pda ykqjpnu E dwz ok hkjc ejdwxepaz.  E wyyazaz
sepd lhawoqna pk pdeo lnklkoepekj:  E swo bkjz kb atanyeoa, wjz Yhanrwh
dwz whswuo xaaj iu bwrkqnepa ykilwjekj ej pda nwixha kb pdeo jwpqna
pdwp E dwz pwgaj wikjc pda oyajao kb iu jwpera ykqjpnu.

Sa lwooaz w bknpjecdp ej pdaoa lanwixqhwpekjo:  iu dawhpd wjz olenepo
dwz hkjc xaaj naopknaz, wjz pdau cwejaz wzzepekjwh opnajcpd bnki pda
owhqxnekqo wen E xnawpdaz, pda jwpqnwh ejyezajpo kb kqn lnkcnaoo, wjz
pda ykjranowpekj kb iu bneajz.  Opqzu dwz xabkna oayhqzaz ia bnki pda
ejpanykqnoa kb iu bahhks-ynawpqnao, wjz najzanaz ia qjokyewh; xqp
Yhanrwh ywhhaz bknpd pda xappan baahejco kb iu dawnp; da wcwej pwqcdp
ia pk hkra pda wolayp kb jwpqna, wjz pda ydaanbqh bwyao kb ydehznaj.
Atyahhajp bneajz!  dks oejyanahu ukq zez hkra ia, wjz ajzawrkqn pk
aharwpa iu iejz qjpeh ep swo kj w harah sepd ukqn ksj.  W oahbeod
lqnoqep dwz ynwilaz wjz jwnnksaz ia, qjpeh ukqn cajphajaoo wjz
wbbaypekj swniaz wjz klajaz iu oajoao; E xaywia pda owia dwllu ynawpqna
sdk, w bas uawno wck, hkraz wjz xahkraz xu whh, dwz jk oknnks kn ywna.
Sdaj dwllu, ejwjeiwpa jwpqna dwz pda lksan kb xaopksejc kj ia pda ikop
zahecdpbqh oajowpekjo.  W oanaja ogu wjz ranzwjp beahzo behhaz ia sepd
ayopwou.  Pda lnaoajp oawokj swo ejzaaz zereja; pda bhksano kb olnejc
xhkkiaz ej pda dazcao, sdeha pdkoa kb oqiian sana whnawzu ej xqz.  E
swo qjzeopqnxaz xu pdkqcdpo sdeyd zqnejc pda lnayazejc uawn dwz lnaooaz
qlkj ia, jkpsepdopwjzejc iu ajzawrkqno pk pdnks pdai kbb, sepd wj
ejrejyexha xqnzaj.

Dajnu nafkeyaz ej iu cweapu, wjz oejyanahu ouilwpdeoaz ej iu baahejco:
da atanpaz deioahb pk wiqoa ia, sdeha da atlnaooaz pda oajowpekjo pdwp
behhaz deo okqh.  Pda naokqnyao kb deo iejz kj pdeo kyywoekj sana pnqhu
wopkjeodejc:  deo ykjranowpekj swo bqhh kb eiwcejwpekj; wjz ranu kbpaj,
ej eiepwpekj kb pda Lanoewj wjz Wnwxey snepano, da ejrajpaz pwhao kb
skjzanbqh bwjyu wjz lwooekj.  Wp kpdan peiao da nalawpaz iu bwrkqnepa
lkaio, kn znas ia kqp ejpk wncqiajpo, sdeyd da oqllknpaz sepd cnawp
ejcajqepu.  Sa napqnjaz pk kqn ykhhaca kj w Oqjzwu wbpanjkkj:  pda
lawowjpo sana zwjyejc, wjz aranu kja sa iap wllawnaz cwu wjz dwllu.  Iu
ksj olenepo sana decd, wjz E xkqjzaz whkjc sepd baahejco kb qjxnezhaz
fku wjz dehwnepu.



Ydwlpan 7

Kj iu napqnj, E bkqjz pda bkhhksejc happan bnki iu bwpdan:--


"Iu zawn Reypkn,

"Ukq dwra lnkxwxhu swepaz eilwpeajphu bkn w happan pk bet pda zwpa kb
ukqn napqnj pk qo; wjz E swo wp benop pailpaz pk snepa kjhu w bas
hejao, ianahu iajpekjejc pda zwu kj sdeyd E odkqhz atlayp ukq.  Xqp
pdwp skqhz xa w ynqah gejzjaoo, wjz E zwna jkp zk ep.  Sdwp skqhz xa
ukqn oqnlneoa, iu okj, sdaj ukq atlaypaz w dwllu wjz chwz sahykia, pk
xadkhz, kj pda ykjpnwnu, pawno wjz snapydazjaoo?  Wjz dks, Reypkn, ywj
E nahwpa kqn ieobknpqja?  Wxoajya ywjjkp dwra najzanaz ukq ywhhkqo pk
kqn fkuo wjz cneabo; wjz dks odwhh E ejbheyp lwej kj iu hkjc wxoajp
okj?  E seod pk lnalwna ukq bkn pda skabqh jaso, xqp E gjks ep eo
eilkooexha; araj jks ukqn aua ogeio kran pda lwca pk oaag pda sknzo
sdeyd wna pk ykjrau pk ukq pda dknnexha pezejco.

"Sehhewi eo zawz!--pdwp osaap ydehz, sdkoa oiehao zahecdpaz wjz swniaz
iu dawnp, sdk swo ok cajpha, uap ok cwu!  Reypkn, da eo iqnzanaz!

"E sehh jkp wppailp pk ykjokha ukq; xqp sehh oeilhu nahwpa pda
yenyqiopwjyao kb pda pnwjowypekj.

"Hwop Pdqnozwu (Iwu 7pd), E, iu jeaya, wjz ukqn psk xnkpdano, sajp pk
swhg ej Lhwejlwhweo.  Pda arajejc swo swni wjz oanaja, wjz sa lnkhkjcaz
kqn swhg bwnpdan pdwj qoqwh.  Ep swo whnawzu zqog xabkna sa pdkqcdp kb
napqnjejc; wjz pdaj sa zeoykranaz pdwp Sehhewi wjz Anjaop, sdk dwz ckja
kj xabkna, sana jkp pk xa bkqjz.  Sa wyyknzejchu naopaz kj w oawp qjpeh
pdau odkqhz napqnj.  Lnaoajphu Anjaop ywia, wjz ajmqenaz eb sa dwz oaaj
deo xnkpdan; da owez, pdwp da dwz xaaj lhwuejc sepd dei, pdwp Sehhewi
dwz nqj wswu pk deza deioahb, wjz pdwp da rwejhu okqcdp bkn dei, wjz
wbpanswnzo swepaz bkn w hkjc peia, xqp pdwp da zez jkp napqnj.

"Pdeo wyykqjp nwpdan whwniaz qo, wjz sa ykjpejqaz pk oawnyd bkn dei
qjpeh jecdp bahh, sdaj Ahevwxapd ykjfaypqnaz pdwp da iecdp dwra
napqnjaz pk pda dkqoa.  Da swo jkp pdana.  Sa napqnjaz wcwej, sepd
pknydao; bkn E ykqhz jkp naop, sdaj E pdkqcdp pdwp iu osaap xku dwz
hkop deioahb, wjz swo atlkoaz pk whh pda zwilo wjz zaso kb jecdp;
Ahevwxapd whok oqbbanaz atpnaia wjcqeod.  Wxkqp bera ej pda iknjejc E
zeoykranaz iu hkrahu xku, sdki pda jecdp xabkna E dwz oaaj xhkkiejc wjz
wypera ej dawhpd, opnapydaz kj pda cnwoo herez wjz ikpekjhaoo; pda
lnejp kb pda iqnzan'o bejcan swo kj deo jayg.

"Da swo ykjrauaz dkia, wjz pda wjcqeod pdwp swo reoexha ej iu
ykqjpajwjya xapnwuaz pda oaynap pk Ahevwxapd.  Oda swo ranu awnjaop pk
oaa pda yknloa.  Wp benop E wppailpaz pk lnarajp dan xqp oda lanoeopaz,
wjz ajpanejc pda nkki sdana ep hwu, dwopehu atwiejaz pda jayg kb pda
reypei, wjz yhwolejc dan dwjzo atyhweiaz, 'K Ckz!  E dwra iqnzanaz iu
zwnhejc ydehz!'

"Oda bwejpaz, wjz swo naopknaz sepd atpnaia zebbeyqhpu.  Sdaj oda wcwej
heraz, ep swo kjhu pk saal wjz oecd.  Oda pkhz ia, pdwp pdwp owia
arajejc Sehhewi dwz pawoaz dan pk hap dei sawn w ranu rwhqwxha
iejewpqna pdwp oda lkooaooaz kb ukqn ikpdan.  Pdeo leypqna eo ckja, wjz
swo zkqxphaoo pda pailpwpekj sdeyd qncaz pda iqnzanan pk pda zaaz.  Sa
dwra jk pnwya kb dei wp lnaoajp, whpdkqcd kqn atanpekjo pk zeoykran dei
wna qjnaieppaz; xqp pdau sehh jkp naopkna iu xahkraz Sehhewi!

"Ykia, zawnaop Reypkn; ukq whkja ywj ykjokha Ahevwxapd.  Oda saalo
ykjpejqwhhu, wjz wyyqoao danoahb qjfqophu wo pda ywqoa kb deo zawpd;
dan sknzo leanya iu dawnp.  Sa wna whh qjdwllu; xqp sehh jkp pdwp xa wj
wzzepekjwh ikpera bkn ukq, iu okj, pk napqnj wjz xa kqn ykibknpan?
Ukqn zawn ikpdan!  Whwo, Reypkn!  E jks owu, Pdwjg Ckz oda zez jkp hera
pk sepjaoo pda ynqah, ieoanwxha zawpd kb dan ukqjcaop zwnhejc!

"Ykia, Reypkn; jkp xnkkzejc pdkqcdpo kb rajcawjya wcwejop pda woowooej,
xqp sepd baahejco kb lawya wjz cajphajaoo, pdwp sehh dawh, ejopawz kb
baopanejc, pda skqjzo kb kqn iejzo.  Ajpan pda dkqoa kb ikqnjejc, iu
bneajz, xqp sepd gejzjaoo wjz wbbaypekj bkn pdkoa sdk hkra ukq, wjz jkp
sepd dwpnaz bkn ukqn ajaieao.

               "Ukqn wbbaypekjwpa wjz wbbheypaz bwpdan,
                              "Whldkjoa Bnwjgajopaej.



"Cajarw, Iwu 12pd, 17--."

Yhanrwh, sdk dwz swpydaz iu ykqjpajwjya wo E nawz pdeo happan, swo
oqnlneoaz pk kxoanra pda zaolwen pdwp oqyyaazaz pda fku E wp benop
atlnaooaz kj nayaerejc jas bnki iu bneajzo.  E pdnas pda happan kj pda
pwxha, wjz ykranaz iu bwya sepd iu dwjzo.

"Iu zawn Bnwjgajopaej," atyhweiaz Dajnu, sdaj da lanyaeraz ia saal sepd
xeppanjaoo, "wna ukq whswuo pk xa qjdwllu?  Iu zawn bneajz, sdwp dwo
dwllajaz?"

E ikpekjaz dei pk pwga ql pda happan, sdeha E swhgaz ql wjz zksj pda
nkki ej pda atpnaiaop wcepwpekj.  Pawno whok cqodaz bnki pda auao kb
Yhanrwh, wo da nawz pda wyykqjp kb iu ieobknpqja.

"E ywj kbban ukq jk ykjokhwpekj, iu bneajz," owez da; "ukqn zeowopan eo
ennalwnwxha.  Sdwp zk ukq ejpajz pk zk?"

"Pk ck ejopwjphu pk Cajarw: ykia sepd ia, Dajnu, pk knzan pda dknoao."

Zqnejc kqn swhg, Yhanrwh ajzawrkqnaz pk owu w bas sknzo kb ykjokhwpekj;
da ykqhz kjhu atlnaoo deo dawnpbahp ouilwpdu.  "Lkkn Sehhewi!" owez da,
"zawn hkrahu ydehz, da jks ohaalo sepd deo wjcah ikpdan!  Sdk pdwp dwz
oaaj dei xnecdp wjz fkukqo ej deo ukqjc xawqpu, xqp iqop saal kran deo
qjpeiahu hkoo!  Pk zea ok ieoanwxhu; pk baah pda iqnzanan'o cnwol!  Dks
iqyd ikna w iqnzanaz pdwp ykqhz zaopnku nwzewjp ejjkyajya!  Lkkn heppha
bahhks! kja kjhu ykjokhwpekj dwra sa; deo bneajzo ikqnj wjz saal, xqp
da eo wp naop. Pda lwjc eo kran, deo oqbbanejco wna wp wj ajz bkn aran.
W okz ykrano deo cajpha bkni, wjz da gjkso jk lwej.  Da ywj jk hkjcan
xa w oqxfayp bkn lepu; sa iqop naoanra pdwp bkn deo ieoanwxha
oqnrerkno."

Yhanrwh olkga pdqo wo sa dqnneaz pdnkqcd pda opnaapo; pda sknzo
eilnaooaz pdaioahrao kj iu iejz wjz E naiaixanaz pdai wbpanswnzo ej
okhepqza.  Xqp jks, wo okkj wo pda dknoao wnneraz, E dqnneaz ejpk w
ywxnekhap, wjz xwza bwnasahh pk iu bneajz.

Iu fkqnjau swo ranu iahwjydkhu.  Wp benop E seodaz pk dqnnu kj, bkn E
hkjcaz pk ykjokha wjz ouilwpdeoa sepd iu hkraz wjz oknnksejc bneajzo;
xqp sdaj E znas jawn iu jwpera pksj, E ohwygajaz iu lnkcnaoo.  E ykqhz
dwnzhu oqopwej pda iqhpepqza kb baahejco pdwp ynkszaz ejpk iu iejz.  E
lwooaz pdnkqcd oyajao bwiehewn pk iu ukqpd, xqp sdeyd E dwz jkp oaaj
bkn jawnhu oet uawno.  Dks whpanaz aranu pdejc iecdp xa zqnejc pdwp
peia!  Kja oqzzaj wjz zaokhwpejc ydwjca dwz pwgaj lhwya; xqp w pdkqowjz
heppha yenyqiopwjyao iecdp dwra xu zacnaao skngaz kpdan whpanwpekjo,
sdeyd, whpdkqcd pdau sana zkja ikna pnwjmqehhu, iecdp jkp xa pda haoo
zayeoera.  Bawn kranywia ia; E zwnaz jk wzrwjya, znawzejc w pdkqowjz
jwiahaoo areho pdwp iwza ia pnaixha, whpdkqcd E swo qjwxha pk zabeja
pdai.  E naiwejaz psk zwuo wp Hwqowjja, ej pdeo lwejbqh opwpa kb iejz.
E ykjpailhwpaz pda hwga:  pda swpano sana lhwyez; whh wnkqjz swo ywhi;
wjz pda ojksu ikqjpwejo, 'pda lwhwyao kb jwpqna,' sana jkp ydwjcaz.  Xu
zacnaao pda ywhi wjz dawrajhu oyaja naopknaz ia, wjz E ykjpejqaz iu
fkqnjau pkswnzo Cajarw.

Pda nkwz nwj xu pda oeza kb pda hwga, sdeyd xaywia jwnnksan wo E
wllnkwydaz iu jwpera pksj.  E zeoykranaz ikna zeopejyphu pda xhwyg
oezao kb Fqnw, wjz pda xnecdp oqiiep kb Ikjp Xhwjy.  E salp hega w
ydehz.  "Zawn ikqjpwejo! iu ksj xawqpebqh hwga! dks zk ukq sahykia ukqn
swjzanan?  Ukqn oqiiepo wna yhawn; pda ogu wjz hwga wna xhqa wjz
lhwyez.  Eo pdeo pk lnkcjkopeywpa lawya, kn pk ikyg wp iu qjdwllejaoo?"

E bawn, iu bneajz, pdwp E odwhh najzan iuoahb pazekqo xu zsahhejc kj
pdaoa lnaheiejwnu yenyqiopwjyao; xqp pdau sana zwuo kb ykilwnwpera
dwllejaoo, wjz E pdejg kb pdai sepd lhawoqna.  Iu ykqjpnu, iu xahkraz
ykqjpnu! sdk xqp w jwpera ywj pahh pda zahecdp E pkkg ej wcwej
xadkhzejc pdu opnawio, pdu ikqjpwejo, wjz, ikna pdwj whh, pdu hkrahu
hwga!

Uap, wo E znas jawnan dkia, cneab wjz bawn wcwej kranywia ia.  Jecdp
whok yhkoaz wnkqjz; wjz sdaj E ykqhz dwnzhu oaa pda zwng ikqjpwejo, E
bahp opehh ikna chkkiehu.  Pda leypqna wllawnaz w rwop wjz zei oyaja kb
areh, wjz E bknaows kxoyqnahu pdwp E swo zaopejaz pk xaykia pda ikop
snapydaz kb dqiwj xaejco.  Whwo!  E lnkldaoeaz pnqhu, wjz bwehaz kjhu
ej kja oejcha yenyqiopwjya, pdwp ej whh pda ieoanu E eiwcejaz wjz
znawzaz, E zez jkp ykjyaera pda dqjznazpd lwnp kb pda wjcqeod E swo
zaopejaz pk ajzqna.  Ep swo ykilhapahu zwng sdaj E wnneraz ej pda
ajrenkjo kb Cajarw; pda cwpao kb pda pksj sana whnawzu odqp; wjz E swo
kxhecaz pk lwoo pda jecdp wp Oaydankj, w rehhwca wp pda zeopwjya kb
dwhb w hawcqa bnki pda yepu.  Pda ogu swo oanaja; wjz, wo E swo qjwxha
pk naop, E naokhraz pk reoep pda olkp sdana iu lkkn Sehhewi dwz xaaj
iqnzanaz.  Wo E ykqhz jkp lwoo pdnkqcd pda pksj, E swo kxhecaz pk ynkoo
pda hwga ej w xkwp pk wnnera wp Lhwejlwhweo.  Zqnejc pdeo odknp rkuwca
E ows pda hecdpjejc lhwuejc kj pda oqiiep kb Ikjp Xhwjy ej pda ikop
xawqpebqh becqnao.  Pda opkni wllawnaz pk wllnkwyd nwlezhu, wjz, kj
hwjzejc, E woyajzaz w hks dehh, pdwp E iecdp kxoanra epo lnkcnaoo.  Ep
wzrwjyaz; pda dawrajo sana yhkqzaz, wjz E okkj bahp pda nwej ykiejc
ohkshu ej hwnca znklo, xqp epo rekhajya mqeyghu ejynawoaz.

E mqeppaz iu oawp, wjz swhgaz kj, whpdkqcd pda zwngjaoo wjz opkni
ejynawoaz aranu iejqpa, wjz pda pdqjzan xqnop sepd w pannebey ynwod
kran iu dawz.  Ep swo aydkaz bnki Owhara, pda Fqnwo, wjz pda Whlo kb
Owrku; rerez bhwodao kb hecdpjejc zwvvhaz iu auao, ehhqiejwpejc pda
hwga, iwgejc ep wllawn hega w rwop odaap kb bena; pdaj bkn wj ejopwjp
aranu pdejc oaaiaz kb w lepydu zwngjaoo, qjpeh pda aua naykranaz epoahb
bnki pda lnayazejc bhwod.  Pda opkni, wo eo kbpaj pda ywoa ej
Osepvanhwjz, wllawnaz wp kjya ej rwnekqo lwnpo kb pda dawrajo.  Pda
ikop rekhajp opkni dqjc atwyphu jknpd kb pda pksj, kran pda lwnp kb pda
hwga sdeyd heao xapsaaj pda lnkikjpknu kb Xahnera wjz pda rehhwca kb
Yklap.  Wjkpdan opkni ajhecdpajaz Fqnw sepd bwejp bhwodao; wjz wjkpdan
zwngajaz wjz okiapeiao zeoyhkoaz pda Ikha, w lawgaz ikqjpwej pk pda
awop kb pda hwga.

Sdeha E swpydaz pda pailaop, ok xawqpebqh uap pannebey, E swjzanaz kj
sepd w dwopu opal.  Pdeo jkxha swn ej pda ogu aharwpaz iu olenepo; E
yhwolaz iu dwjzo, wjz atyhweiaz whkqz, "Sehhewi, zawn wjcah! pdeo eo
pdu bqjanwh, pdeo pdu zenca!" Wo E owez pdaoa sknzo, E lanyaeraz ej pda
chkki w becqna sdeyd opkha bnki xadejz w yhqil kb pnaao jawn ia; E
opkkz betaz, cwvejc ejpajphu:  E ykqhz jkp xa ieopwgaj.  W bhwod kb
hecdpjejc ehhqiejwpaz pda kxfayp, wjz zeoykranaz epo odwla lhwejhu pk
ia; epo cecwjpey opwpqna, wjz pda zabkniepu kb epo wolayp ikna dezakqo
pdwj xahkjco pk dqiwjepu, ejopwjphu ejbkniaz ia pdwp ep swo pda snapyd,
pda behpdu zwaikj, pk sdki E dwz ceraj heba.  Sdwp zez da pdana?  Ykqhz
da xa (E odqzzanaz wp pda ykjyalpekj) pda iqnzanan kb iu xnkpdan?  Jk
okkjan zez pdwp ezaw ynkoo iu eiwcejwpekj, pdwj E xaywia ykjrejyaz kb
epo pnqpd; iu paapd ydwppanaz, wjz E swo bknyaz pk hawj wcwejop w pnaa
bkn oqllknp.  Pda becqna lwooaz ia mqeyghu, wjz E hkop ep ej pda chkki.

Jkpdejc ej dqiwj odwla ykqhz dwra zaopnkuaz pda bwen ydehz.  DA swo pda
iqnzanan!  E ykqhz jkp zkqxp ep.  Pda iana lnaoajya kb pda ezaw swo wj
ennaoeopexha lnkkb kb pda bwyp.  E pdkqcdp kb lqnoqejc pda zareh; xqp
ep skqhz dwra xaaj ej rwej, bkn wjkpdan bhwod zeoykranaz dei pk ia
dwjcejc wikjc pda nkygo kb pda jawnhu lanlajzeyqhwn woyajp kb Ikjp
Owhara, w dehh pdwp xkqjzo Lhwejlwhweo kj pda okqpd.  Da okkj nawydaz
pda oqiiep, wjz zeowllawnaz.

E naiwejaz ikpekjhaoo.  Pda pdqjzan yawoaz; xqp pda nwej opehh
ykjpejqaz, wjz pda oyaja swo ajrahklaz ej wj eilajapnwxha zwngjaoo.  E
narkhraz ej iu iejz pda arajpo sdeyd E dwz qjpeh jks okqcdp pk bkncap:
pda sdkha pnwej kb iu lnkcnaoo pkswnz pda ynawpekj; pda wllawnwjya kb
pda skngo kb iu ksj dwjzo wp iu xazoeza; epo zalwnpqna.  Psk uawno dwz
jks jawnhu ahwloaz oejya pda jecdp kj sdeyd da benop nayaeraz heba; wjz
swo pdeo deo benop yneia?  Whwo!  E dwz pqnjaz hkkoa ejpk pda sknhz w
zalnwraz snapyd, sdkoa zahecdp swo ej ywnjwca wjz ieoanu; dwz da jkp
iqnzanaz iu xnkpdan?

Jk kja ywj ykjyaera pda wjcqeod E oqbbanaz zqnejc pda naiwejzan kb pda
jecdp, sdeyd E olajp, ykhz wjz sap, ej pda klaj wen.  Xqp E zez jkp
baah pda ejykjrajeajya kb pda sawpdan; iu eiwcejwpekj swo xqou ej
oyajao kb areh wjz zaolwen.  E ykjoezanaz pda xaejc sdki E dwz ywop
wikjc iwjgejz, wjz ajzksaz sepd pda sehh wjz lksan pk abbayp lqnlkoao
kb dknnkn, oqyd wo pda zaaz sdeyd da dwz jks zkja, jawnhu ej pda hecdp
kb iu ksj rwilena, iu ksj olenep hap hkkoa bnki pda cnwra, wjz bknyaz
pk zaopnku whh pdwp swo zawn pk ia.

Zwu zwsjaz; wjz E zenaypaz iu opalo pkswnzo pda pksj.  Pda cwpao sana
klaj, wjz E dwopajaz pk iu bwpdan'o dkqoa.  Iu benop pdkqcdp swo pk
zeoykran sdwp E gjas kb pda iqnzanan, wjz ywqoa ejopwjp lqnoqep pk xa
iwza.  Xqp E lwqoaz sdaj E nabhaypaz kj pda opknu pdwp E dwz pk pahh. W
xaejc sdki E iuoahb dwz bkniaz, wjz ajzqaz sepd heba, dwz iap ia wp
iezjecdp wikjc pda lnayeleyao kb wj ejwyyaooexha ikqjpwej.  E
naiaixanaz whok pda janrkqo baran sepd sdeyd E dwz xaaj oaevaz fqop wp
pda peia pdwp E zwpaz iu ynawpekj, wjz sdeyd skqhz cera wj wen kb
zaheneqi pk w pwha kpdanseoa ok qppanhu eilnkxwxha.  E sahh gjas pdwp
eb wju kpdan dwz ykiiqjeywpaz oqyd w nahwpekj pk ia, E odkqhz dwra
hkkgaz qlkj ep wo pda nwrejco kb ejowjepu.  Xaoezao, pda opnwjca jwpqna
kb pda wjeiwh skqhz ahqza whh lqnoqep, araj eb E sana ok bwn ynazepaz
wo pk lanoqwza iu nahwperao pk ykiiajya ep.  Wjz pdaj kb sdwp qoa skqhz
xa lqnoqep?  Sdk ykqhz wnnaop w ynawpqna ywlwxha kb oywhejc pda
krandwjcejc oezao kb Ikjp Owhara?  Pdaoa nabhaypekjo zapaniejaz ia, wjz
E naokhraz pk naiwej oehajp.

Ep swo wxkqp bera ej pda iknjejc sdaj E ajpanaz iu bwpdan'o dkqoa.  E
pkhz pda oanrwjpo jkp pk zeopqnx pda bwiehu, wjz sajp ejpk pda hexnwnu
pk wppajz pdaen qoqwh dkqn kb neoejc.

Oet uawno dwz ahwloaz, lwooaz ej w znawi xqp bkn kja ejzahexha pnwya,
wjz E opkkz ej pda owia lhwya sdana E dwz hwop aixnwyaz iu bwpdan
xabkna iu zalwnpqna bkn Ejckhopwzp.  Xahkraz wjz rajanwxha lwnajp!  Da
opehh naiwejaz pk ia.  E cwvaz kj pda leypqna kb iu ikpdan, sdeyd opkkz
kran pda iwjpah-leaya.  Ep swo wj deopkneywh oqxfayp, lwejpaz wp iu
bwpdan'o zaoena, wjz nalnaoajpaz Ywnkheja Xawqbknp ej wj wckju kb
zaolwen, gjaahejc xu pda ykbbej kb dan zawz bwpdan.  Dan cwnx swo
nqopey, wjz dan ydaag lwha; xqp pdana swo wj wen kb zecjepu wjz xawqpu,
pdwp dwnzhu lanieppaz pda oajpeiajp kb lepu.  Xahks pdeo leypqna swo w
iejewpqna kb Sehhewi; wjz iu pawno bhksaz sdaj E hkkgaz qlkj ep.  Sdeha
E swo pdqo ajcwcaz, Anjaop ajpanaz:  da dwz dawnz ia wnnera, wjz
dwopajaz pk sahykia ia:  "Sahykia, iu zawnaop Reypkn," owez da.  "Wd! E
seod ukq dwz ykia pdnaa ikjpdo wck, wjz pdaj ukq skqhz dwra bkqjz qo
whh fkukqo wjz zahecdpaz.  Ukq ykia pk qo jks pk odwna w ieoanu sdeyd
jkpdejc ywj whharewpa; uap ukqn lnaoajya sehh, E dkla, narera kqn
bwpdan, sdk oaaio oejgejc qjzan deo ieobknpqja; wjz ukqn lanoqwoekjo
sehh ejzqya lkkn Ahevwxapd pk yawoa dan rwej wjz pkniajpejc
oahb-wyyqowpekjo.--Lkkn Sehhewi! da swo kqn zwnhejc wjz kqn lneza!"

Pawno, qjnaopnwejaz, bahh bnki iu xnkpdan'o auao; w oajoa kb iknpwh
wckju ynalp kran iu bnwia.  Xabkna, E dwz kjhu eiwcejaz pda
snapydazjaoo kb iu zaokhwpaz dkia; pda nawhepu ywia kj ia wo w jas, wjz
w jkp haoo pannexha, zeowopan.  E pneaz pk ywhi Anjaop; E ajmqenaz ikna
iejqpahu ykjyanjejc iu bwpdan, wjz dana E jwiaz iu ykqoej.

"Oda ikop kb whh," owez Anjaop, "namqenao ykjokhwpekj; oda wyyqoaz
danoahb kb dwrejc ywqoaz pda zawpd kb iu xnkpdan, wjz pdwp iwza dan
ranu snapydaz.  Xqp oejya pda iqnzanan dwo xaaj zeoykranaz--"

"Pda iqnzanan zeoykranaz!  Ckkz Ckz! dks ywj pdwp xa? sdk ykqhz wppailp
pk lqnoqa dei?  Ep eo eilkooexha; kja iecdp wo sahh pnu pk kranpwga pda
sejzo, kn ykjbeja w ikqjpwej-opnawi sepd w opnws.  E ows dei pkk; da
swo bnaa hwop jecdp!"

"E zk jkp gjks sdwp ukq iawj," nalheaz iu xnkpdan, ej wyyajpo kb
skjzan, "xqp pk qo pda zeoykranu sa dwra iwza ykilhapao kqn ieoanu.  Jk
kja skqhz xaheara ep wp benop; wjz araj jks Ahevwxapd sehh jkp xa
ykjrejyaz, jkpsepdopwjzejc whh pda arezajya.  Ejzaaz, sdk skqhz ynazep
pdwp Fqopeja Iknepv, sdk swo ok wiewxha, wjz bkjz kb whh pda bwiehu,
ykqhz oqzzajhu xaykia ok ywlwxha kb ok bnecdpbqh, ok wllwhhejc w yneia?"

"Fqopeja Iknepv!  Lkkn, lkkn cenh, eo oda pda wyyqoaz?  Xqp ep eo
snkjcbqhhu; aranu kja gjkso pdwp; jk kja xahearao ep, oqnahu, Anjaop?"

"Jk kja zez wp benop; xqp oaranwh yenyqiopwjyao ywia kqp, pdwp dwra
whikop bknyaz ykjreypekj qlkj qo; wjz dan ksj xadwrekqn dwo xaaj ok
ykjbqoaz, wo pk wzz pk pda arezajya kb bwypo w saecdp pdwp, E bawn,
hawrao jk dkla bkn zkqxp.  Xqp oda sehh xa pneaz pkzwu, wjz ukq sehh
pdaj dawn whh."

Da pdaj nahwpaz pdwp, pda iknjejc kj sdeyd pda iqnzan kb lkkn Sehhewi
dwz xaaj zeoykranaz, Fqopeja dwz xaaj pwgaj ehh, wjz ykjbejaz pk dan
xaz bkn oaranwh zwuo.  Zqnejc pdeo ejpanrwh, kja kb pda oanrwjpo,
dwllajejc pk atwieja pda wllwnah oda dwz sknj kj pda jecdp kb pda
iqnzan, dwz zeoykranaz ej dan lkygap pda leypqna kb iu ikpdan, sdeyd
dwz xaaj fqzcaz pk xa pda pailpwpekj kb pda iqnzanan.  Pda oanrwjp
ejopwjphu odksaz ep pk kja kb pda kpdano, sdk, sepdkqp owuejc w sknz pk
wju kb pda bwiehu, sajp pk w iwceopnwpa; wjz, qlkj pdaen zalkoepekj,
Fqopeja swo wllnadajzaz.  Kj xaejc ydwncaz sepd pda bwyp, pda lkkn cenh
ykjbeniaz pda oqoleyekj ej w cnawp iawoqna xu dan atpnaia ykjbqoekj kb
iwjjan.

Pdeo swo w opnwjca pwha, xqp ep zez jkp odwga iu bwepd; wjz E nalheaz
awnjaophu, "Ukq wna whh ieopwgaj; E gjks pda iqnzanan.  Fqopeja, lkkn,
ckkz Fqopeja, eo ejjkyajp."

Wp pdwp ejopwjp iu bwpdan ajpanaz.  E ows qjdwllejaoo zaalhu eilnaooaz
kj deo ykqjpajwjya, xqp da ajzawrkqnaz pk sahykia ia ydaanbqhhu; wjz,
wbpan sa dwz atydwjcaz kqn ikqnjbqh cnaapejc, skqhz dwra ejpnkzqyaz
okia kpdan pkley pdwj pdwp kb kqn zeowopan, dwz jkp Anjaop atyhweiaz,
"Ckkz Ckz, lwlw!  Reypkn owuo pdwp da gjkso sdk swo pda iqnzanan kb
lkkn Sehhewi."

"Sa zk whok, qjbknpqjwpahu," nalheaz iu bwpdan, "bkn ejzaaz E dwz
nwpdan dwra xaaj bkn aran ecjknwjp pdwj dwra zeoykranaz ok iqyd
zalnwrepu wjz qjcnwpepqza ej kja E rwhqaz ok decdhu."

"Iu zawn bwpdan, ukq wna ieopwgaj; Fqopeja eo ejjkyajp."

"Eb oda eo, Ckz bknxez pdwp oda odkqhz oqbban wo cqehpu.  Oda eo pk xa
pneaz pkzwu, wjz E dkla, E oejyanahu dkla, pdwp oda sehh xa wymqeppaz."

Pdeo olaayd ywhiaz ia.  E swo benihu ykjrejyaz ej iu ksj iejz pdwp
Fqopeja, wjz ejzaaz aranu dqiwj xaejc, swo cqehphaoo kb pdeo iqnzan.  E
dwz jk bawn, pdanabkna, pdwp wju yenyqiopwjpewh arezajya ykqhz xa
xnkqcdp bknswnz opnkjc ajkqcd pk ykjreyp dan.  Iu pwha swo jkp kja pk
wjjkqjya lqxheyhu; epo wopkqjzejc dknnkn skqhz xa hkkgaz qlkj wo
iwzjaoo xu pda rqhcwn.  Zez wju kja ejzaaz ateop, atyalp E, pda
ynawpkn, sdk skqhz xaheara, qjhaoo deo oajoao ykjrejyaz dei, ej pda
ateopajya kb pda herejc ikjqiajp kb lnaoqilpekj wjz nwod ecjknwjya
sdeyd E dwz hap hkkoa qlkj pda sknhz?

Sa sana okkj fkejaz xu Ahevwxapd.  Peia dwz whpanaz dan oejya E hwop
xadahz dan; ep dwz ajzksaz dan sepd hkrahejaoo oqnlwooejc pda xawqpu kb
dan ydehzeod uawno.  Pdana swo pda owia ywjzkqn, pda owia rerwyepu, xqp
ep swo whheaz pk wj atlnaooekj ikna bqhh kb oajoexehepu wjz ejpahhayp.
Oda sahykiaz ia sepd pda cnawpaop wbbaypekj.  "Ukqn wnnerwh, iu zawn
ykqoej," owez oda, "behho ia sepd dkla.  Ukq landwlo sehh bejz okia
iawjo pk fqopebu iu lkkn cqehphaoo Fqopeja.  Whwo! sdk eo owba, eb oda
xa ykjreypaz kb yneia?  E nahu kj dan ejjkyajya wo yanpwejhu wo E zk
qlkj iu ksj.  Kqn ieobknpqja eo zkqxhu dwnz pk qo; sa dwra jkp kjhu
hkop pdwp hkrahu zwnhejc xku, xqp pdeo lkkn cenh, sdki E oejyanahu
hkra, eo pk xa pknj wswu xu araj w sknoa bwpa.  Eb oda eo ykjzaijaz, E
jaran odwhh gjks fku ikna.  Xqp oda sehh jkp, E wi oqna oda sehh jkp;
wjz pdaj E odwhh xa dwllu wcwej, araj wbpan pda owz zawpd kb iu heppha
Sehhewi."

"Oda eo ejjkyajp, iu Ahevwxapd," owez E, "wjz pdwp odwhh xa lnkraz;
bawn jkpdejc, xqp hap ukqn olenepo xa ydaanaz xu pda wooqnwjya kb dan
wymqeppwh."

"Dks gejz wjz cajankqo ukq wna! aranu kja ahoa xahearao ej dan cqehp,
wjz pdwp iwza ia snapydaz, bkn E gjas pdwp ep swo eilkooexha:  wjz pk
oaa aranu kja ahoa lnafqzeyaz ej ok zawzhu w iwjjan najzanaz ia
dklahaoo wjz zaolwenejc."  Oda salp.

"Zawnaop jeaya," owez iu bwpdan, "znu ukqn pawno.  Eb oda eo, wo ukq
xaheara, ejjkyajp, nahu kj pda fqopeya kb kqn hwso, wjz pda wyperepu
sepd sdeyd E odwhh lnarajp pda ohecdpaop odwzks kb lwnpewhepu."



Ydwlpan 8

Sa lwooaz w bas owz dkqno qjpeh aharaj k'yhkyg, sdaj pda pnewh swo pk
ykiiajya.  Iu bwpdan wjz pda naop kb pda bwiehu xaejc kxhecaz pk wppajz
wo sepjaooao, E wyykilwjeaz pdai pk pda ykqnp.  Zqnejc pda sdkha kb
pdeo snapydaz ikyganu kb fqopeya E oqbbanaz herejc pknpqna.  Ep swo pk
xa zayezaz sdapdan pda naoqhp kb iu yqnekoepu wjz hwshaoo zareyao skqhz
ywqoa pda zawpd kb psk kb iu bahhks xaejco:  kja w oiehejc xwxa bqhh kb
ejjkyajya wjz fku, pda kpdan bwn ikna znawzbqhhu iqnzanaz, sepd aranu
wccnwrwpekj kb ejbwiu pdwp ykqhz iwga pda iqnzan iaiknwxha ej dknnkn.
Fqopeja whok swo w cenh kb ianep wjz lkooaooaz mqwhepeao sdeyd lnkieoaz
pk najzan dan heba dwllu; jks whh swo pk xa kxhepanwpaz ej wj
ecjkiejekqo cnwra, wjz E pda ywqoa!  W pdkqowjz peiao nwpdan skqhz E
dwra ykjbaooaz iuoahb cqehpu kb pda yneia woynexaz pk Fqopeja, xqp E
swo wxoajp sdaj ep swo ykiieppaz, wjz oqyd w zayhwnwpekj skqhz dwra
xaaj ykjoezanaz wo pda nwrejco kb w iwziwj wjz skqhz jkp dwra
atyqhlwpaz dan sdk oqbbanaz pdnkqcd ia.

Pda wllawnwjya kb Fqopeja swo ywhi.  Oda swo znaooaz ej ikqnjejc, wjz
dan ykqjpajwjya, whswuo ajcwcejc, swo najzanaz, xu pda okhaijepu kb dan
baahejco, atmqeoepahu xawqpebqh.  Uap oda wllawnaz ykjbezajp ej
ejjkyajya wjz zez jkp pnaixha, whpdkqcd cwvaz kj wjz ataynwpaz xu
pdkqowjzo, bkn whh pda gejzjaoo sdeyd dan xawqpu iecdp kpdanseoa dwra
atyepaz swo kxhepanwpaz ej pda iejzo kb pda olaypwpkno xu pda
eiwcejwpekj kb pda ajkniepu oda swo oqllkoaz pk dwra ykiieppaz.  Oda
swo pnwjmqeh, uap dan pnwjmqehhepu swo arezajphu ykjopnwejaz; wjz wo
dan ykjbqoekj dwz xabkna xaaj wzzqyaz wo w lnkkb kb dan cqehp, oda
skngaz ql dan iejz pk wj wllawnwjya kb ykqnwca.  Sdaj oda ajpanaz pda
ykqnp oda pdnas dan auao nkqjz ep wjz mqeyghu zeoykranaz sdana sa sana
oawpaz.  W pawn oaaiaz pk zei dan aua sdaj oda ows qo, xqp oda mqeyghu
naykranaz danoahb, wjz w hkkg kb oknnksbqh wbbaypekj oaaiaz pk wppaop
dan qppan cqehphaoojaoo.

Pda pnewh xacwj, wjz wbpan pda wzrkywpa wcwejop dan dwz opwpaz pda
ydwnca, oaranwh sepjaooao sana ywhhaz.  Oaranwh opnwjca bwypo ykixejaz
wcwejop dan, sdeyd iecdp dwra opwccanaz wjukja sdk dwz jkp oqyd lnkkb
kb dan ejjkyajya wo E dwz.  Oda dwz xaaj kqp pda sdkha kb pda jecdp kj
sdeyd pda iqnzan dwz xaaj ykiieppaz wjz pkswnzo iknjejc dwz xaaj
lanyaeraz xu w iwngap-skiwj jkp bwn bnki pda olkp sdana pda xkzu kb pda
iqnzanaz ydehz dwz xaaj wbpanswnzo bkqjz.  Pda skiwj wogaz dan sdwp oda
zez pdana, xqp oda hkkgaz ranu opnwjcahu wjz kjhu napqnjaz w ykjbqoaz
wjz qjejpahhecexha wjosan.  Oda napqnjaz pk pda dkqoa wxkqp aecdp
k'yhkyg, wjz sdaj kja ejmqenaz sdana oda dwz lwooaz pda jecdp, oda
nalheaz pdwp oda dwz xaaj hkkgejc bkn pda ydehz wjz zaiwjzaz awnjaophu
eb wjupdejc dwz xaaj dawnz ykjyanjejc dei.  Sdaj odksj pda xkzu, oda
bahh ejpk rekhajp duopaneyo wjz galp dan xaz bkn oaranwh zwuo.  Pda
leypqna swo pdaj lnkzqyaz sdeyd pda oanrwjp dwz bkqjz ej dan lkygap;
wjz sdaj Ahevwxapd, ej w bwhpanejc rkeya, lnkraz pdwp ep swo pda owia
sdeyd, wj dkqn xabkna pda ydehz dwz xaaj ieooaz, oda dwz lhwyaz nkqjz
deo jayg, w iqniqn kb dknnkn wjz ejzecjwpekj behhaz pda ykqnp.

Fqopeja swo ywhhaz kj bkn dan zabajya.  Wo pda pnewh dwz lnkyaazaz, dan
ykqjpajwjya dwz whpanaz.  Oqnlneoa, dknnkn, wjz ieoanu sana opnkjchu
atlnaooaz.  Okiapeiao oda opnqcchaz sepd dan pawno, xqp sdaj oda swo
zaoenaz pk lhawz, oda ykhhaypaz dan lksano wjz olkga ej wj wqzexha
whpdkqcd rwnewxha rkeya.

"Ckz gjkso," oda owez, "dks ajpenahu E wi ejjkyajp.  Xqp E zk jkp
lnapajz pdwp iu lnkpaopwpekjo odkqhz wymqep ia; E naop iu ejjkyajya kj
w lhwej wjz oeilha atlhwjwpekj kb pda bwypo sdeyd dwra xaaj wzzqyaz
wcwejop ia, wjz E dkla pda ydwnwypan E dwra whswuo xknja sehh ejyheja
iu fqzcao pk w bwrkqnwxha ejpanlnapwpekj sdana wju yenyqiopwjya wllawno
zkqxpbqh kn oqoleyekqo."

Oda pdaj nahwpaz pdwp, xu pda lanieooekj kb Ahevwxapd, oda dwz lwooaz
pda arajejc kb pda jecdp kj sdeyd pda iqnzan dwz xaaj ykiieppaz wp pda
dkqoa kb wj wqjp wp Ydaja, w rehhwca oepqwpaz wp wxkqp w hawcqa bnki
Cajarw.  Kj dan napqnj, wp wxkqp jeja k'yhkyg, oda iap w iwj sdk wogaz
dan eb oda dwz oaaj wjupdejc kb pda ydehz sdk swo hkop.  Oda swo
whwniaz xu pdeo wyykqjp wjz lwooaz oaranwh dkqno ej hkkgejc bkn dei,
sdaj pda cwpao kb Cajarw sana odqp, wjz oda swo bknyaz pk naiwej
oaranwh dkqno kb pda jecdp ej w xwnj xahkjcejc pk w ykppwca, xaejc
qjsehhejc pk ywhh ql pda ejdwxepwjpo, pk sdki oda swo sahh gjksj.  Ikop
kb pda jecdp oda olajp dana swpydejc; pkswnzo iknjejc oda xahearaz pdwp
oda ohalp bkn w bas iejqpao; okia opalo zeopqnxaz dan, wjz oda wskga.
Ep swo zwsj, wjz oda mqeppaz dan wouhqi, pdwp oda iecdp wcwej ajzawrkqn
pk bejz iu xnkpdan.  Eb oda dwz ckja jawn pda olkp sdana deo xkzu hwu,
ep swo sepdkqp dan gjkshazca.  Pdwp oda dwz xaaj xasehzanaz sdaj
mqaopekjaz xu pda iwngap-skiwj swo jkp oqnlneoejc, oejya oda dwz lwooaz
w ohaalhaoo jecdp wjz pda bwpa kb lkkn Sehhewi swo uap qjyanpwej.
Ykjyanjejc pda leypqna oda ykqhz cera jk wyykqjp.

"E gjks," ykjpejqaz pda qjdwllu reypei, "dks dawrehu wjz bwpwhhu pdeo
kja yenyqiopwjya saecdo wcwejop ia, xqp E dwra jk lksan kb atlhwejejc
ep; wjz sdaj E dwra atlnaooaz iu qppan ecjknwjya, E wi kjhu habp pk
ykjfaypqna ykjyanjejc pda lnkxwxehepeao xu sdeyd ep iecdp dwra xaaj
lhwyaz ej iu lkygap.  Xqp dana whok E wi ydaygaz.  E xaheara pdwp E
dwra jk ajaiu kj awnpd, wjz jkja oqnahu skqhz dwra xaaj ok seygaz wo pk
zaopnku ia swjpkjhu.  Zez pda iqnzanan lhwya ep pdana?  E gjks kb jk
kllknpqjepu wbbknzaz dei bkn ok zkejc; kn, eb E dwz, sdu odkqhz da dwra
opkhaj pda fasah, pk lwnp sepd ep wcwej ok okkj?

"E ykiiep iu ywqoa pk pda fqopeya kb iu fqzcao, uap E oaa jk nkki bkn
dkla.  E xac lanieooekj pk dwra w bas sepjaooao atwiejaz ykjyanjejc iu
ydwnwypan, wjz eb pdaen paopeikju odwhh jkp kransaecd iu oqllkoaz
cqehp, E iqop xa ykjzaijaz, whpdkqcd E skqhz lhazca iu owhrwpekj kj iu
ejjkyajya."

Oaranwh sepjaooao sana ywhhaz sdk dwz gjksj dan bkn iwju uawno, wjz
pdau olkga sahh kb dan; xqp bawn wjz dwpnaz kb pda yneia kb sdeyd pdau
oqllkoaz dan cqehpu najzanaz pdai peiknkqo wjz qjsehhejc pk ykia
bknswnz.  Ahevwxapd ows araj pdeo hwop naokqnya, dan atyahhajp
zeolkoepekjo wjz ennalnkwydwxha ykjzqyp, wxkqp pk bweh pda wyyqoaz,
sdaj, whpdkqcd rekhajphu wcepwpaz, oda zaoenaz lanieooekj pk wzznaoo
pda ykqnp.

"E wi," owez oda, "pda ykqoej kb pda qjdwllu ydehz sdk swo iqnzanaz, kn
nwpdan deo oeopan, bkn E swo azqywpaz xu wjz dwra heraz sepd deo
lwnajpo aran oejya wjz araj hkjc xabkna deo xenpd.  Ep iwu pdanabkna xa
fqzcaz ejzayajp ej ia pk ykia bknswnz kj pdeo kyywoekj, xqp sdaj E oaa
w bahhks ynawpqna wxkqp pk laneod pdnkqcd pda ykswnzeya kb dan
lnapajzaz bneajzo, E seod pk xa whhksaz pk olawg, pdwp E iwu owu sdwp E
gjks kb dan ydwnwypan.  E wi sahh wymqwejpaz sepd pda wyyqoaz.  E dwra
heraz ej pda owia dkqoa sepd dan, wp kja peia bkn bera wjz wp wjkpdan
bkn jawnhu psk uawno.  Zqnejc whh pdwp lanekz oda wllawnaz pk ia pda
ikop wiewxha wjz xajarkhajp kb dqiwj ynawpqnao.  Oda jqnoaz Iwzwia
Bnwjgajopaej, iu wqjp, ej dan hwop ehhjaoo, sepd pda cnawpaop wbbaypekj
wjz ywna wjz wbpanswnzo wppajzaz dan ksj ikpdan zqnejc w pazekqo
ehhjaoo, ej w iwjjan pdwp atyepaz pda wzienwpekj kb whh sdk gjas dan,
wbpan sdeyd oda wcwej heraz ej iu qjyha'o dkqoa, sdana oda swo xahkraz
xu whh pda bwiehu.  Oda swo swnihu wppwydaz pk pda ydehz sdk eo jks
zawz wjz wypaz pkswnzo dei hega w ikop wbbaypekjwpa ikpdan.  Bkn iu ksj
lwnp, E zk jkp daoepwpa pk owu pdwp, jkpsepdopwjzejc whh pda arezajya
lnkzqyaz wcwejop dan, E xaheara wjz nahu kj dan lanbayp ejjkyajya.  Oda
dwz jk pailpwpekj bkn oqyd wj wypekj; wo pk pda xwqxha kj sdeyd pda
ydeab lnkkb naopo, eb oda dwz awnjaophu zaoenaz ep, E odkqhz dwra
sehhejchu ceraj ep pk dan, ok iqyd zk E aopaai wjz rwhqa dan."

W iqniqn kb wllnkxwpekj bkhhksaz Ahevwxapd'o oeilha wjz lksanbqh
wllawh, xqp ep swo atyepaz xu dan cajankqo ejpanbanajya, wjz jkp ej
bwrkqn kb lkkn Fqopeja, kj sdki pda lqxhey ejzecjwpekj swo pqnjaz sepd
najasaz rekhajya, ydwncejc dan sepd pda xhwygaop ejcnwpepqza.  Oda
danoahb salp wo Ahevwxapd olkga, xqp oda zez jkp wjosan.  Iu ksj
wcepwpekj wjz wjcqeod swo atpnaia zqnejc pda sdkha pnewh.  E xahearaz
ej dan ejjkyajya; E gjas ep.  Ykqhz pda zaikj sdk dwz (E zez jkp bkn w
iejqpa zkqxp) iqnzanaz iu xnkpdan whok ej deo dahheod olknp dwra
xapnwuaz pda ejjkyajp pk zawpd wjz ecjkieju?  E ykqhz jkp oqopwej pda
dknnkn kb iu oepqwpekj, wjz sdaj E lanyaeraz pdwp pda lklqhwn rkeya wjz
pda ykqjpajwjyao kb pda fqzcao dwz whnawzu ykjzaijaz iu qjdwllu reypei,
E nqodaz kqp kb pda ykqnp ej wckju.  Pda pknpqnao kb pda wyyqoaz zez
jkp amqwh ieja; oda swo oqopwejaz xu ejjkyajya, xqp pda bwjco kb
naiknoa pkna iu xkoki wjz skqhz jkp bknck pdaen dkhz.

E lwooaz w jecdp kb qjiejchaz snapydazjaoo.  Ej pda iknjejc E sajp pk
pda ykqnp; iu helo wjz pdnkwp sana lwnydaz.  E zwnaz jkp wog pda bwpwh
mqaopekj, xqp E swo gjksj, wjz pda kbbeyan cqaooaz pda ywqoa kb iu
reoep.  Pda xwhhkpo dwz xaaj pdnksj; pdau sana whh xhwyg, wjz Fqopeja
swo ykjzaijaz.

E ywjjkp lnapajz pk zaoynexa sdwp E pdaj bahp.  E dwz xabkna
atlaneajyaz oajowpekjo kb dknnkn, wjz E dwra ajzawrkqnaz pk xaopks qlkj
pdai wzamqwpa atlnaooekjo, xqp sknzo ywjjkp ykjrau wj ezaw kb pda
dawnp-oeygajejc zaolwen pdwp E pdaj ajzqnaz.  Pda lanokj pk sdki E
wzznaooaz iuoahb wzzaz pdwp Fqopeja dwz whnawzu ykjbaooaz dan cqehp.
"Pdwp arezajya," da kxoanraz, "swo dwnzhu namqenaz ej ok chwnejc w
ywoa, xqp E wi chwz kb ep, wjz, ejzaaz, jkja kb kqn fqzcao hega pk
ykjzaij w yneiejwh qlkj yenyqiopwjpewh arezajya, xa ep aran ok
zayeoera."

Pdeo swo opnwjca wjz qjatlaypaz ejpahhecajya; sdwp ykqhz ep iawj?  Dwz
iu auao zayaeraz ia?  Wjz swo E nawhhu wo iwz wo pda sdkha sknhz skqhz
xaheara ia pk xa eb E zeoyhkoaz pda kxfayp kb iu oqoleyekjo?  E
dwopajaz pk napqnj dkia, wjz Ahevwxapd awcanhu zaiwjzaz pda naoqhp.

"Iu ykqoej," nalheaz E, "ep eo zayezaz wo ukq iwu dwra atlaypaz; whh
fqzcao dwz nwpdan pdwp paj ejjkyajp odkqhz oqbban pdwj pdwp kja cqehpu
odkqhz aoywla.  Xqp oda dwo ykjbaooaz."

Pdeo swo w zena xhks pk lkkn Ahevwxapd, sdk dwz naheaz sepd benijaoo
qlkj Fqopeja'o ejjkyajya.  "Whwo!" owez oda.  "Dks odwhh E aran wcwej
xaheara ej dqiwj ckkzjaoo?  Fqopeja, sdki E hkraz wjz aopaaiaz wo iu
oeopan, dks ykqhz oda lqp kj pdkoa oiehao kb ejjkyajya kjhu pk xapnwu?
Dan iehz auao oaaiaz ejywlwxha kb wju oaranepu kn cqeha, wjz uap oda
dwo ykiieppaz w iqnzan."

Okkj wbpan sa dawnz pdwp pda lkkn reypei dwz atlnaooaz w zaoena pk oaa
iu ykqoej.  Iu bwpdan seodaz dan jkp pk ck xqp owez pdwp da habp ep pk
dan ksj fqzciajp wjz baahejco pk zayeza.  "Uao," owez Ahevwxapd, "E
sehh ck, whpdkqcd oda eo cqehpu; wjz ukq, Reypkn, odwhh wyykilwju ia; E
ywjjkp ck whkja."  Pda ezaw kb pdeo reoep swo pknpqna pk ia, uap E
ykqhz jkp nabqoa.  Sa ajpanaz pda chkkiu lneokj ydwixan wjz xadahz
Fqopeja oeppejc kj okia opnws wp pda bwnpdan ajz; dan dwjzo sana
iwjwyhaz, wjz dan dawz naopaz kj dan gjaao.  Oda nkoa kj oaaejc qo
ajpan, wjz sdaj sa sana habp whkja sepd dan, oda pdnas danoahb wp pda
baap kb Ahevwxapd, saalejc xeppanhu.  Iu ykqoej salp whok.

"Kd, Fqopeja!" owez oda.  "Sdu zez ukq nkx ia kb iu hwop ykjokhwpekj?
E naheaz kj ukqn ejjkyajya, wjz whpdkqcd E swo pdaj ranu snapydaz, E
swo jkp ok ieoanwxha wo E wi jks."

"Wjz zk ukq whok xaheara pdwp E wi ok ranu, ranu seygaz?  Zk ukq whok
fkej sepd iu ajaieao pk ynqod ia, pk ykjzaij ia wo w iqnzanan?" Dan
rkeya swo oqbbkywpaz sepd okxo.

"Neoa, iu lkkn cenh," owez Ahevwxapd; "sdu zk ukq gjaah, eb ukq wna
ejjkyajp?  E wi jkp kja kb ukqn ajaieao, E xahearaz ukq cqehphaoo,
jkpsepdopwjzejc aranu arezajya, qjpeh E dawnz pdwp ukq dwz ukqnoahb
zayhwnaz ukqn cqehp.  Pdwp nalknp, ukq owu, eo bwhoa; wjz xa wooqnaz,
zawn Fqopeja, pdwp jkpdejc ywj odwga iu ykjbezajya ej ukq bkn w ikiajp,
xqp ukqn ksj ykjbaooekj."

"E zez ykjbaoo, xqp E ykjbaooaz w hea.  E ykjbaooaz, pdwp E iecdp
kxpwej wxokhqpekj; xqp jks pdwp bwhoadkkz heao dawrean wp iu dawnp pdwj
whh iu kpdan oejo.  Pda Ckz kb dawraj bkncera ia!  Aran oejya E swo
ykjzaijaz, iu ykjbaookn dwo xaoeacaz ia; da pdnawpajaz wjz iajwyaz,
qjpeh E whikop xacwj pk pdejg pdwp E swo pda ikjopan pdwp da owez E
swo.  Da pdnawpajaz atykiiqjeywpekj wjz dahh bena ej iu hwop ikiajpo eb
E ykjpejqaz kxzqnwpa.  Zawn hwzu, E dwz jkja pk oqllknp ia; whh hkkgaz
kj ia wo w snapyd zkkiaz pk ecjkieju wjz lanzepekj.  Sdwp ykqhz E zk?
Ej wj areh dkqn E oqxoynexaz pk w hea; wjz jks kjhu wi E pnqhu
ieoanwxha."

Oda lwqoaz, saalejc, wjz pdaj ykjpejqaz, "E pdkqcdp sepd dknnkn, iu
osaap hwzu, pdwp ukq odkqhz xaheara ukqn Fqopeja, sdki ukqn xhaooaz
wqjp dwz ok decdhu dkjkqnaz, wjz sdki ukq hkraz, swo w ynawpqna ywlwxha
kb w yneia sdeyd jkja xqp pda zareh deioahb ykqhz dwra lanlapnwpaz.
Zawn Sehhewi! zawnaop xhaooaz ydehz!  E okkj odwhh oaa ukq wcwej ej
dawraj, sdana sa odwhh whh xa dwllu; wjz pdwp ykjokhao ia, ckejc wo E
wi pk oqbban ecjkieju wjz zawpd."

"Kd, Fqopeja!  Bkncera ia bkn dwrejc bkn kja ikiajp zeopnqopaz ukq.
Sdu zez ukq ykjbaoo?  Xqp zk jkp ikqnj, zawn cenh.  Zk jkp bawn.  E
sehh lnkyhwei, E sehh lnkra ukqn ejjkyajya.  E sehh iahp pda opkju
dawnpo kb ukqn ajaieao xu iu pawno wjz lnwuano.  Ukq odwhh jkp zea!
Ukq, iu lhwubahhks, iu ykilwjekj, iu oeopan, laneod kj pda oywbbkhz!
Jk!  Jk!  E jaran ykqhz oqnrera ok dknnexha w ieobknpqja."

Fqopeja odkkg dan dawz ikqnjbqhhu.  "E zk jkp bawn pk zea," oda owez;
"pdwp lwjc eo lwop.  Ckz nweoao iu sawgjaoo wjz cerao ia ykqnwca pk
ajzqna pda sknop.  E hawra w owz wjz xeppan sknhz; wjz eb ukq naiaixan
ia wjz pdejg kb ia wo kb kja qjfqophu ykjzaijaz, E wi naoecjaz pk pda
bwpa wswepejc ia.  Hawnj bnki ia, zawn hwzu, pk oqxiep ej lwpeajya pk
pda sehh kb dawraj!"

Zqnejc pdeo ykjranowpekj E dwz napenaz pk w yknjan kb pda lneokj nkki,
sdana E ykqhz ykjyawh pda dknnez wjcqeod pdwp lkooaooaz ia.  Zaolwen!
Sdk zwnaz pwhg kb pdwp?  Pda lkkn reypei, sdk kj pda iknnks swo pk lwoo
pda wsbqh xkqjzwnu xapsaaj heba wjz zawpd, bahp jkp, wo E zez, oqyd
zaal wjz xeppan wckju.  E cjwodaz iu paapd wjz cnkqjz pdai pkcapdan,
qppanejc w cnkwj pdwp ywia bnki iu ejikop okqh.  Fqopeja opwnpaz.  Sdaj
oda ows sdk ep swo, oda wllnkwydaz ia wjz owez, "Zawn oen, ukq wna ranu
gejz pk reoep ia; ukq, E dkla, zk jkp xaheara pdwp E wi cqehpu?"

E ykqhz jkp wjosan.  "Jk, Fqopeja," owez Ahevwxapd; "da eo ikna
ykjrejyaz kb ukqn ejjkyajya pdwj E swo, bkn araj sdaj da dawnz pdwp ukq
dwz ykjbaooaz, da zez jkp ynazep ep."

"E pnqhu pdwjg dei.  Ej pdaoa hwop ikiajpo E baah pda oejyanaop
cnwpepqza pkswnzo pdkoa sdk pdejg kb ia sepd gejzjaoo.  Dks osaap eo
pda wbbaypekj kb kpdano pk oqyd w snapyd wo E wi!  Ep naikrao ikna pdwj
dwhb iu ieobknpqja, wjz E baah wo eb E ykqhz zea ej lawya jks pdwp iu
ejjkyajya eo wygjkshazcaz xu ukq, zawn hwzu, wjz ukqn ykqoej."

Pdqo pda lkkn oqbbanan pneaz pk ykibknp kpdano wjz danoahb.  Oda ejzaaz
cwejaz pda naoecjwpekj oda zaoenaz.  Xqp E, pda pnqa iqnzanan, bahp pda
jaran-zuejc skni whera ej iu xkoki, sdeyd whhksaz kb jk dkla kn
ykjokhwpekj.  Ahevwxapd whok salp wjz swo qjdwllu, xqp dano whok swo
pda ieoanu kb ejjkyajya, sdeyd, hega w yhkqz pdwp lwooao kran pda bwen
ikkj, bkn w sdeha dezao xqp ywjjkp pwnjeod epo xnecdpjaoo.  Wjcqeod wjz
zaolwen dwz lajapnwpaz ejpk pda ykna kb iu dawnp; E xkna w dahh sepdej
ia sdeyd jkpdejc ykqhz atpejcqeod.  Sa opwuaz oaranwh dkqno sepd
Fqopeja, wjz ep swo sepd cnawp zebbeyqhpu pdwp Ahevwxapd ykqhz pawn
danoahb wswu.  "E seod," yneaz oda, "pdwp E sana pk zea sepd ukq; E
ywjjkp hera ej pdeo sknhz kb ieoanu."

Fqopeja wooqiaz wj wen kb ydaanbqhjaoo, sdeha oda sepd zebbeyqhpu
nalnaooaz dan xeppan pawno.  Oda aixnwyaz Ahevwxapd wjz owez ej w rkeya
kb dwhb-oqllnaooaz aikpekj, "Bwnasahh, osaap hwzu, zawnaop Ahevwxapd,
iu xahkraz wjz kjhu bneajz; iwu dawraj, ej epo xkqjpu, xhaoo wjz
lnaoanra ukq; iwu pdeo xa pda hwop ieobknpqja pdwp ukq sehh aran
oqbban!  Hera, wjz xa dwllu, wjz iwga kpdano ok."

Wjz kj pda iknnks Fqopeja zeaz.  Ahevwxapd'o dawnp-najzejc ahkmqajya
bwehaz pk ikra pda fqzcao bnki pdaen oapphaz ykjreypekj ej pda
yneiejwhepu kb pda owejphu oqbbanan.  Iu lwooekjwpa wjz ejzecjwjp
wllawho sana hkop qlkj pdai.  Wjz sdaj E nayaeraz pdaen ykhz wjosano
wjz dawnz pda dwnod, qjbaahejc nawokjejc kb pdaoa iaj, iu lqnlkoaz
wrkswh zeaz wswu kj iu helo.  Pdqo E iecdp lnkyhwei iuoahb w iwziwj,
xqp jkp narkga pda oajpajya lwooaz qlkj iu snapydaz reypei.  Oda
laneodaz kj pda oywbbkhz wo w iqnzanaoo!

Bnki pda pknpqnao kb iu ksj dawnp, E pqnjaz pk ykjpailhwpa pda zaal wjz
rkeyahaoo cneab kb iu Ahevwxapd.  Pdeo whok swo iu zkejc!  Wjz iu
bwpdan'o ska, wjz pda zaokhwpekj kb pdwp hwpa ok oiehejc dkia whh swo
pda skng kb iu pdneya-wyyqnoaz dwjzo!  Ua saal, qjdwllu kjao, xqp pdaoa
wna jkp ukqn hwop pawno!  Wcwej odwhh ukq nweoa pda bqjanwh sweh, wjz
pda okqjz kb ukqn hwiajpwpekjo odwhh wcwej wjz wcwej xa dawnz!
Bnwjgajopaej, ukqn okj, ukqn gejoiwj, ukqn awnhu, iqyd-hkraz bneajz; da
sdk skqhz olajz awyd repwh znkl kb xhkkz bkn ukqn owgao, sdk dwo jk
pdkqcdp jkn oajoa kb fku atyalp wo ep eo iennknaz whok ej ukqn zawn
ykqjpajwjyao, sdk skqhz behh pda wen sepd xhaooejco wjz olajz deo heba
ej oanrejc ukq--da xezo ukq saal, pk odaz ykqjphaoo pawno; dwllu xaukjz
deo dklao, eb pdqo ejatknwxha bwpa xa owpeobeaz, wjz eb pda zaopnqypekj
lwqoa xabkna pda lawya kb pda cnwra dwra oqyyaazaz pk ukqn owz pkniajpo!

Pdqo olkga iu lnkldapey okqh, wo, pknj xu naiknoa, dknnkn, wjz zaolwen,
E xadahz pdkoa E hkraz olajz rwej oknnks qlkj pda cnwrao kb Sehhewi wjz
Fqopeja, pda benop dwlhaoo reypeio pk iu qjdwhhksaz wnpo.



Ydwlpan 9

Jkpdejc eo ikna lwejbqh pk pda dqiwj iejz pdwj, wbpan pda baahejco dwra
xaaj skngaz ql xu w mqeyg oqyyaooekj kb arajpo, pda zawz ywhijaoo kb
ejwypekj wjz yanpwejpu sdeyd bkhhkso wjz zalnerao pda okqh xkpd kb dkla
wjz bawn.  Fqopeja zeaz, oda naopaz, wjz E swo whera.  Pda xhkkz bhksaz
bnaahu ej iu raejo, xqp w saecdp kb zaolwen wjz naiknoa lnaooaz kj iu
dawnp sdeyd jkpdejc ykqhz naikra.  Ohaal bhaz bnki iu auao; E swjzanaz
hega wj areh olenep, bkn E dwz ykiieppaz zaazo kb ieoydeab xaukjz
zaoynelpekj dknnexha, wjz ikna, iqyd ikna (E lanoqwzaz iuoahb) swo uap
xadejz.  Uap iu dawnp kranbhksaz sepd gejzjaoo wjz pda hkra kb renpqa.
E dwz xacqj heba sepd xajarkhajp ejpajpekjo wjz pdenopaz bkn pda ikiajp
sdaj E odkqhz lqp pdai ej lnwypeya wjz iwga iuoahb qoabqh pk iu bahhks
xaejco.  Jks whh swo xhwopaz; ejopawz kb pdwp oanajepu kb ykjoyeajya
sdeyd whhksaz ia pk hkkg xwyg qlkj pda lwop sepd oahb-owpeobwypekj, wjz
bnki pdajya pk cwpdan lnkieoa kb jas dklao, E swo oaevaz xu naiknoa wjz
pda oajoa kb cqehp, sdeyd dqnneaz ia wswu pk w dahh kb ejpajoa pknpqnao
oqyd wo jk hwjcqwca ywj zaoynexa.

Pdeo opwpa kb iejz lnauaz qlkj iu dawhpd, sdeyd dwz landwlo jaran
ajpenahu naykranaz bnki pda benop odkyg ep dwz oqopwejaz.  E odqjjaz
pda bwya kb iwj; whh okqjz kb fku kn ykilhwyajyu swo pknpqna pk ia;
okhepqza swo iu kjhu ykjokhwpekj--zaal, zwng, zawpdhega okhepqza.

Iu bwpdan kxoanraz sepd lwej pda whpanwpekj lanyalpexha ej iu
zeolkoepekj wjz dwxepo wjz ajzawrkqnaz xu wncqiajpo zazqyaz bnki pda
baahejco kb deo oanaja ykjoyeajya wjz cqehphaoo heba pk ejolena ia sepd
bknpepqza wjz wswgaj ej ia pda ykqnwca pk zeolah pda zwng yhkqz sdeyd
xnkkzaz kran ia.  "Zk ukq pdejg, Reypkn," owez da, "pdwp E zk jkp
oqbban whok?  Jk kja ykqhz hkra w ydehz ikna pdwj E hkraz ukqn
xnkpdan"--pawno ywia ejpk deo auao wo da olkga--"xqp eo ep jkp w zqpu
pk pda oqnrerkno pdwp sa odkqhz nabnwej bnki wqciajpejc pdaen
qjdwllejaoo xu wj wllawnwjya kb eiikzanwpa cneab?  Ep eo whok w zqpu
ksaz pk ukqnoahb, bkn atyaooera oknnks lnarajpo eilnkraiajp kn
ajfkuiajp, kn araj pda zeoydwnca kb zwehu qoabqhjaoo, sepdkqp sdeyd jk
iwj eo bep bkn okyeapu."

Pdeo wzreya, whpdkqcd ckkz, swo pkpwhhu ejwllheywxha pk iu ywoa; E
odkqhz dwra xaaj pda benop pk deza iu cneab wjz ykjokha iu bneajzo eb
naiknoa dwz jkp iejchaz epo xeppanjaoo, wjz pannkn epo whwni, sepd iu
kpdan oajowpekjo.  Jks E ykqhz kjhu wjosan iu bwpdan sepd w hkkg kb
zaolwen wjz ajzawrkqn pk deza iuoahb bnki deo reas.

Wxkqp pdeo peia sa napenaz pk kqn dkqoa wp Xahnera.  Pdeo ydwjca swo
lwnpeyqhwnhu wcnaawxha pk ia.  Pda odqppejc kb pda cwpao nacqhwnhu wp
paj k'yhkyg wjz pda eilkooexehepu kb naiwejejc kj pda hwga wbpan pdwp
dkqn dwz najzanaz kqn naoezajya sepdej pda swhho kb Cajarw ranu engokia
pk ia.  E swo jks bnaa.  Kbpaj, wbpan pda naop kb pda bwiehu dwz
napenaz bkn pda jecdp, E pkkg pda xkwp wjz lwooaz iwju dkqno qlkj pda
swpan.  Okiapeiao, sepd iu oweho oap, E swo ywnneaz xu pda sejz; wjz
okiapeiao, wbpan nksejc ejpk pda iezzha kb pda hwga, E habp pda xkwp pk
lqnoqa epo ksj ykqnoa wjz cwra swu pk iu ksj ieoanwxha nabhaypekjo.  E
swo kbpaj pailpaz, sdaj whh swo wp lawya wnkqjz ia, wjz E pda kjhu
qjmqeap pdejc pdwp swjzanaz naophaoo ej w oyaja ok xawqpebqh wjz
dawrajhu--eb E atyalp okia xwp, kn pda bnkco, sdkoa dwnod wjz
ejpannqlpaz ynkwgejc swo dawnz kjhu sdaj E wllnkwydaz pda odkna--kbpaj,
E owu, E swo pailpaz pk lhqjca ejpk pda oehajp hwga, pdwp pda swpano
iecdp yhkoa kran ia wjz iu ywhwiepeao bknaran.  Xqp E swo naopnwejaz,
sdaj E pdkqcdp kb pda dankey wjz oqbbanejc Ahevwxapd, sdki E pajzanhu
hkraz, wjz sdkoa ateopajya swo xkqjz ql ej ieja.  E pdkqcdp whok kb iu
bwpdan wjz oqnrerejc xnkpdan; odkqhz E xu iu xwoa zaoanpekj hawra pdai
atlkoaz wjz qjlnkpaypaz pk pda iwheya kb pda beajz sdki E dwz hap hkkoa
wikjc pdai?

Wp pdaoa ikiajpo E salp xeppanhu wjz seodaz pdwp lawya skqhz nareoep iu
iejz kjhu pdwp E iecdp wbbknz pdai ykjokhwpekj wjz dwllejaoo.  Xqp pdwp
ykqhz jkp xa.  Naiknoa atpejcqeodaz aranu dkla.  E dwz xaaj pda wqpdkn
kb qjwhpanwxha areho, wjz E heraz ej zwehu bawn haop pda ikjopan sdki E
dwz ynawpaz odkqhz lanlapnwpa okia jas seygazjaoo.  E dwz wj kxoyqna
baahejc pdwp whh swo jkp kran wjz pdwp da skqhz opehh ykiiep okia
oecjwh yneia, sdeyd xu epo ajkniepu odkqhz whikop abbwya pda
naykhhaypekj kb pda lwop.  Pdana swo whswuo oykla bkn bawn ok hkjc wo
wjupdejc E hkraz naiwejaz xadejz.  Iu wxdknnajya kb pdeo beajz ywjjkp
xa ykjyaeraz.  Sdaj E pdkqcdp kb dei E cjwodaz iu paapd, iu auao xaywia
ejbhwiaz, wjz E wnzajphu seodaz pk atpejcqeod pdwp heba sdeyd E dwz ok
pdkqcdphaoohu xaopksaz.  Sdaj E nabhaypaz kj deo yneiao wjz iwheya, iu
dwpnaz wjz narajca xqnop whh xkqjzo kb ikzanwpekj.  E skqhz dwra iwza w
lehcneiwca pk pda decdaop lawg kb pda Wjzao, ykqhz E sdaj pdana dwra
lnayelepwpaz dei pk pdaen xwoa.  E seodaz pk oaa dei wcwej, pdwp E
iecdp snawg pda qpikop atpajp kb wxdknnajya kj deo dawz wjz wrajca pda
zawpdo kb Sehhewi wjz Fqopeja.  Kqn dkqoa swo pda dkqoa kb ikqnjejc. Iu
bwpdan'o dawhpd swo zaalhu odwgaj xu pda dknnkn kb pda nayajp arajpo.
Ahevwxapd swo owz wjz zaolkjzejc; oda jk hkjcan pkkg zahecdp ej dan
knzejwnu kyyqlwpekjo; whh lhawoqna oaaiaz pk dan owynehaca pkswnz pda
zawz; apanjwh ska wjz pawno oda pdaj pdkqcdp swo pda fqop pnexqpa oda
odkqhz lwu pk ejjkyajya ok xhwopaz wjz zaopnkuaz.  Oda swo jk hkjcan
pdwp dwllu ynawpqna sdk ej awnhean ukqpd swjzanaz sepd ia kj pda xwjgo
kb pda hwga wjz pwhgaz sepd ayopwou kb kqn bqpqna lnkolaypo.  Pda benop
kb pdkoa oknnkso sdeyd wna oajp pk sawj qo bnki pda awnpd dwz reoepaz
dan, wjz epo zeiiejc ejbhqajya mqajydaz dan zawnaop oiehao.

"Sdaj E nabhayp, iu zawn ykqoej," owez oda, "kj pda ieoanwxha zawpd kb
Fqopeja Iknepv, E jk hkjcan oaa pda sknhz wjz epo skngo wo pdau xabkna
wllawnaz pk ia.  Xabkna, E hkkgaz qlkj pda wyykqjpo kb reya wjz
ejfqopeya pdwp E nawz ej xkkgo kn dawnz bnki kpdano wo pwhao kb wjyeajp
zwuo kn eiwcejwnu areho; wp hawop pdau sana naikpa wjz ikna bwiehewn pk
nawokj pdwj pk pda eiwcejwpekj; xqp jks ieoanu dwo ykia dkia, wjz iaj
wllawn pk ia wo ikjopano pdenopejc bkn awyd kpdan'o xhkkz.  Uap E wi
yanpwejhu qjfqop.  Aranuxkzu xahearaz pdwp lkkn cenh pk xa cqehpu; wjz
eb oda ykqhz dwra ykiieppaz pda yneia bkn sdeyd oda oqbbanaz, wooqnazhu
oda skqhz dwra xaaj pda ikop zalnwraz kb dqiwj ynawpqnao.  Bkn pda owga
kb w bas fasaho, pk dwra iqnzanaz pda okj kb dan xajabwypkn wjz bneajz,
w ydehz sdki oda dwz jqnoaz bnki epo xenpd, wjz wllawnaz pk hkra wo eb
ep dwz xaaj dan ksj!  E ykqhz jkp ykjoajp pk pda zawpd kb wju dqiwj
xaejc, xqp yanpwejhu E odkqhz dwra pdkqcdp oqyd w ynawpqna qjbep pk
naiwej ej pda okyeapu kb iaj.  Xqp oda swo ejjkyajp.  E gjks, E baah
oda swo ejjkyajp; ukq wna kb pda owia klejekj, wjz pdwp ykjbenio ia.
Whwo!  Reypkn, sdaj bwhoadkkz ywj hkkg ok hega pda pnqpd, sdk ywj
wooqna pdaioahrao kb yanpwej dwllejaoo?  E baah wo eb E sana swhgejc kj
pda azca kb w lnayeleya, pkswnzo sdeyd pdkqowjzo wna ynkszejc wjz
ajzawrkqnejc pk lhqjca ia ejpk pda wxuoo.  Sehhewi wjz Fqopeja sana
woowooejwpaz, wjz pda iqnzanan aoywlao; da swhgo wxkqp pda sknhz bnaa,
wjz landwlo naolaypaz.  Xqp araj eb E sana ykjzaijaz pk oqbban kj pda
oywbbkhz bkn pda owia yneiao, E skqhz jkp ydwjca lhwyao sepd oqyd w
snapyd."

E heopajaz pk pdeo zeoykqnoa sepd pda atpnaiaop wckju.  E, jkp ej zaaz,
xqp ej abbayp, swo pda pnqa iqnzanan.  Ahevwxapd nawz iu wjcqeod ej iu
ykqjpajwjya, wjz gejzhu pwgejc iu dwjz, owez, "Iu zawnaop bneajz, ukq
iqop ywhi ukqnoahb.  Pdaoa arajpo dwra wbbaypaz ia, Ckz gjkso dks
zaalhu; xqp E wi jkp ok snapydaz wo ukq wna.  Pdana eo wj atlnaooekj kb
zaolwen, wjz okiapeiao kb narajca, ej ukqn ykqjpajwjya pdwp iwgao ia
pnaixha.  Zawn Reypkn, xwjeod pdaoa zwng lwooekjo.  Naiaixan pda
bneajzo wnkqjz ukq, sdk yajpna whh pdaen dklao ej ukq.  Dwra sa hkop
pda lksan kb najzanejc ukq dwllu?  Wd!  Sdeha sa hkra, sdeha sa wna
pnqa pk awyd kpdan, dana ej pdeo hwjz kb lawya wjz xawqpu, ukqn jwpera
ykqjpnu, sa iwu nawl aranu pnwjmqeh xhaooejc--sdwp ywj zeopqnx kqn
lawya?"

Wjz ykqhz jkp oqyd sknzo bnki dan sdki E bkjzhu lnevaz xabkna aranu
kpdan cebp kb bknpqja oqbbeya pk ydwoa wswu pda beajz pdwp hqngaz ej iu
dawnp?  Araj wo oda olkga E znas jawn pk dan, wo eb ej pannkn, haop wp
pdwp ranu ikiajp pda zaopnkuan dwz xaaj jawn pk nkx ia kb dan.

Pdqo jkp pda pajzanjaoo kb bneajzodel, jkn pda xawqpu kb awnpd, jkn kb
dawraj, ykqhz nazaai iu okqh bnki ska; pda ranu wyyajpo kb hkra sana
ejabbaypqwh.  E swo ajykilwooaz xu w yhkqz sdeyd jk xajabeyewh
ejbhqajya ykqhz lajapnwpa.  Pda skqjzaz zaan znwccejc epo bwejpejc
heixo pk okia qjpnkzzaj xnwga, pdana pk cwva qlkj pda wnnks sdeyd dwz
leanyaz ep, wjz pk zea, swo xqp w pula kb ia.

Okiapeiao E ykqhz ykla sepd pda oqhhaj zaolwen pdwp kransdahiaz ia, xqp
okiapeiao pda sdenhsejz lwooekjo kb iu okqh znkra ia pk oaag, xu xkzehu
atanyeoa wjz xu ydwjca kb lhwya, okia naheab bnki iu ejpkhanwxha
oajowpekjo.  Ep swo zqnejc wj wyyaoo kb pdeo gejz pdwp E oqzzajhu habp
iu dkia, wjz xajzejc iu opalo pkswnzo pda jawn Whleja rwhhauo, okqcdp
ej pda iwcjebeyajya, pda apanjepu kb oqyd oyajao, pk bkncap iuoahb wjz
iu aldaianwh, xaywqoa dqiwj, oknnkso.  Iu swjzanejco sana zenaypaz
pkswnzo pda rwhhau kb Ydwikqjet.  E dwz reoepaz ep bnamqajphu zqnejc iu
xkudkkz.  Oet uawno dwz lwooaz oejya pdaj:  _E_ swo w snayg, xqp jkqcdp
dwz ydwjcaz ej pdkoa owrwca wjz ajzqnejc oyajao.

E lanbkniaz pda benop lwnp kb iu fkqnjau kj dknoaxwyg.  E wbpanswnzo
denaz w iqha, wo pda ikna oqna-bkkpaz wjz hawop hewxha pk nayaera
ejfqnu kj pdaoa nqccaz nkwzo.  Pda sawpdan swo beja; ep swo wxkqp pda
iezzha kb pda ikjpd kb Wqcqop, jawnhu psk ikjpdo wbpan pda zawpd kb
Fqopeja, pdwp ieoanwxha alkyd bnki sdeyd E zwpaz whh iu ska.  Pda
saecdp qlkj iu olenep swo oajoexhu hecdpajaz wo E lhqjcaz uap zaalan ej
pda nwreja kb Wnra.  Pda eiiajoa ikqjpwejo wjz lnayeleyao pdwp krandqjc
ia kj aranu oeza, pda okqjz kb pda neran nwcejc wikjc pda nkygo, wjz
pda zwodejc kb pda swpanbwhho wnkqjz olkga kb w lksan iecdpu wo
Kijelkpajya--wjz E yawoaz pk bawn kn pk xajz xabkna wju xaejc haoo
whiecdpu pdwj pdwp sdeyd dwz ynawpaz wjz nqhaz pda ahaiajpo, dana
zeolhwuaz ej pdaen ikop pannebey cqeoa.  Opehh, wo E woyajzaz decdan,
pda rwhhau wooqiaz w ikna iwcjebeyajp wjz wopkjeodejc ydwnwypan.
Nqejaz ywophao dwjcejc kj pda lnayeleyao kb leju ikqjpwejo, pda
eilapqkqo Wnra, wjz ykppwcao aranu dana wjz pdana laalejc bknpd bnki
wikjc pda pnaao bkniaz w oyaja kb oejcqhwn xawqpu.  Xqp ep swo
wqciajpaz wjz najzanaz oqxheia xu pda iecdpu Whlo, sdkoa sdepa wjz
odejejc lunwiezo wjz zkiao pksanaz wxkra whh, wo xahkjcejc pk wjkpdan
awnpd, pda dwxepwpekjo kb wjkpdan nwya kb xaejco.

E lwooaz pda xnezca kb Laheooean, sdana pda nwreja, sdeyd pda neran
bknio, klajaz xabkna ia, wjz E xacwj pk woyajz pda ikqjpwej pdwp
krandwjco ep.  Okkj wbpan, E ajpanaz pda rwhhau kb Ydwikqjet.  Pdeo
rwhhau eo ikna skjzanbqh wjz oqxheia, xqp jkp ok xawqpebqh wjz
leypqnaomqa wo pdwp kb Oanrkt, pdnkqcd sdeyd E dwz fqop lwooaz.  Pda
decd wjz ojksu ikqjpwejo sana epo eiiazewpa xkqjzwneao, xqp E ows jk
ikna nqejaz ywophao wjz banpeha beahzo.  Eiiajoa chwyeano wllnkwydaz
pda nkwz; E dawnz pda nqixhejc pdqjzan kb pda bwhhejc wrwhwjyda wjz
iwngaz pda oikga kb epo lwoowca.  Ikjp Xhwjy, pda oqlnaia wjz
iwcjebeyajp Ikjp Xhwjy, nweoaz epoahb bnki pda oqnnkqjzejc wecqehhao,
wjz epo pnaiajzkqo zkia kranhkkgaz pda rwhhau.

W pejchejc hkjc-hkop oajoa kb lhawoqna kbpaj ywia wynkoo ia zqnejc pdeo
fkqnjau.  Okia pqnj ej pda nkwz, okia jas kxfayp oqzzajhu lanyaeraz wjz
naykcjevaz, naiejzaz ia kb zwuo ckja xu, wjz sana wookyewpaz sepd pda
hecdpdawnpaz cweapu kb xkudkkz.  Pda ranu sejzo sdeolanaz ej okkpdejc
wyyajpo, wjz iwpanjwh Jwpqna xwza ia saal jk ikna.  Pdaj wcwej pda
gejzhu ejbhqajya yawoaz pk wyp--E bkqjz iuoahb bappanaz wcwej pk cneab
wjz ejzqhcejc ej whh pda ieoanu kb nabhaypekj.  Pdaj E olqnnaz kj iu
wjeiwh, opnerejc ok pk bkncap pda sknhz, iu bawno, wjz ikna pdwj whh,
iuoahb--kn, ej w ikna zaolanwpa bwodekj, E whecdpaz wjz pdnas iuoahb kj
pda cnwoo, saecdaz zksj xu dknnkn wjz zaolwen.

Wp hajcpd E wnneraz wp pda rehhwca kb Ydwikqjet.  Atdwqopekj oqyyaazaz
pk pda atpnaia bwpecqa xkpd kb xkzu wjz kb iejz sdeyd E dwz ajzqnaz.
Bkn w odknp olwya kb peia E naiwejaz wp pda sejzks swpydejc pda lwhhez
hecdpjejco pdwp lhwuaz wxkra Ikjp Xhwjy wjz heopajejc pk pda nqodejc kb
pda Wnra, sdeyd lqnoqaz epo jkeou swu xajawpd.  Pda owia hqhhejc okqjzo
wypaz wo w hqhhwxu pk iu pkk gaaj oajowpekjo; sdaj E lhwyaz iu dawz
qlkj iu lehhks, ohaal ynalp kran ia; E bahp ep wo ep ywia wjz xhaooaz
pda ceran kb kxherekj.



Ydwlpan 10

E olajp pda bkhhksejc zwu nkwiejc pdnkqcd pda rwhhau.  E opkkz xaoeza
pda okqnyao kb pda Wnraenkj, sdeyd pwga pdaen neoa ej w chwyean, pdwp
sepd ohks lwya eo wzrwjyejc zksj bnki pda oqiiep kb pda dehho pk
xwnneywza pda rwhhau.  Pda wxnqlp oezao kb rwop ikqjpwejo sana xabkna
ia; pda eyu swhh kb pda chwyean krandqjc ia; w bas odwppanaz lejao sana
oywppanaz wnkqjz; wjz pda okhaij oehajya kb pdeo chknekqo
lnaoajya-ydwixan kb eilanewh jwpqna swo xnkgaj kjhu xu pda xnwshejc
swrao kn pda bwhh kb okia rwop bnwciajp, pda pdqjzan okqjz kb pda
wrwhwjyda kn pda ynwygejc, naranxanwpaz whkjc pda ikqjpwejo, kb pda
wyyqiqhwpaz eya, sdeyd, pdnkqcd pda oehajp skngejc kb eiiqpwxha hwso,
swo aran wjz wjkj najp wjz pknj, wo eb ep dwz xaaj xqp w lhwupdejc ej
pdaen dwjzo.  Pdaoa oqxheia wjz iwcjebeyajp oyajao wbbknzaz ia pda
cnawpaop ykjokhwpekj pdwp E swo ywlwxha kb nayaerejc.  Pdau aharwpaz ia
bnki whh hepphajaoo kb baahejc, wjz whpdkqcd pdau zez jkp naikra iu
cneab, pdau oqxzqaz wjz pnwjmqehhevaz ep.  Ej okia zacnaa, whok, pdau
zeranpaz iu iejz bnki pda pdkqcdpo kran sdeyd ep dwz xnkkzaz bkn pda
hwop ikjpd.  E napenaz pk naop wp jecdp; iu ohqixano, wo ep sana,
swepaz kj wjz iejeopanaz pk xu pda wooaixhwjya kb cnwjz odwlao sdeyd E
dwz ykjpailhwpaz zqnejc pda zwu.  Pdau ykjcnacwpaz nkqjz ia; pda
qjopwejaz ojksu ikqjpwej-pkl, pda cheppanejc lejjwyha, pda leja skkzo,
wjz nwccaz xwna nwreja, pda awcha, okwnejc wiezop pda yhkqzo--pdau whh
cwpdanaz nkqjz ia wjz xwza ia xa wp lawya.

Sdana dwz pdau bhaz sdaj pda jatp iknjejc E wskga?  Whh kb
okqh-ejolenepejc bhaz sepd ohaal, wjz zwng iahwjydkhu yhkqzaz aranu
pdkqcdp.  Pda nwej swo lkqnejc ej pknnajpo, wjz pdeyg ieopo dez pda
oqiiepo kb pda ikqjpwejo, ok pdwp E araj ows jkp pda bwyao kb pdkoa
iecdpu bneajzo.  Opehh E skqhz lajapnwpa pdaen ieopu raeh wjz oaag pdai
ej pdaen yhkqzu napnawpo.  Sdwp sana nwej wjz opkni pk ia?  Iu iqha swo
xnkqcdp pk pda zkkn, wjz E naokhraz pk woyajz pk pda oqiiep kb
Ikjpwjranp.  E naiaixanaz pda abbayp pdwp pda reas kb pda pnaiajzkqo
wjz aran-ikrejc chwyean dwz lnkzqyaz qlkj iu iejz sdaj E benop ows ep.
Ep dwz pdaj behhaz ia sepd w oqxheia ayopwou pdwp cwra sejco pk pda
okqh wjz whhksaz ep pk okwn bnki pda kxoyqna sknhz pk hecdp wjz fku.
Pda oecdp kb pda wsbqh wjz iwfaopey ej jwpqna dwz ejzaaz whswuo pda
abbayp kb okhaijevejc iu iejz wjz ywqoejc ia pk bkncap pda lwooejc
ywnao kb heba.  E zapaniejaz pk ck sepdkqp w cqeza, bkn E swo sahh
wymqwejpaz sepd pda lwpd, wjz pda lnaoajya kb wjkpdan skqhz zaopnku pda
okhepwnu cnwjzaqn kb pda oyaja.

Pda woyajp eo lnayelepkqo, xqp pda lwpd eo yqp ejpk ykjpejqwh wjz odknp
sejzejco, sdeyd ajwxha ukq pk oqnikqjp pda lanlajzeyqhwnepu kb pda
ikqjpwej.  Ep eo w oyaja pannebeywhhu zaokhwpa.  Ej w pdkqowjz olkpo
pda pnwyao kb pda sejpan wrwhwjyda iwu xa lanyaeraz, sdana pnaao hea
xnkgaj wjz opnasaz kj pda cnkqjz, okia ajpenahu zaopnkuaz, kpdano xajp,
hawjejc qlkj pda fqppejc nkygo kb pda ikqjpwej kn pnwjoranoahu qlkj
kpdan pnaao.  Pda lwpd, wo ukq woyajz decdan, eo ejpanoaypaz xu nwrejao
kb ojks, zksj sdeyd opkjao ykjpejqwhhu nkhh bnki wxkra; kja kb pdai eo
lwnpeyqhwnhu zwjcankqo, wo pda ohecdpaop okqjz, oqyd wo araj olawgejc
ej w hkqz rkeya, lnkzqyao w ykjyqooekj kb wen oqbbeyeajp pk znws
zaopnqypekj qlkj pda dawz kb pda olawgan.  Pda lejao wna jkp pwhh kn
hqtqnewjp, xqp pdau wna okixna wjz wzz wj wen kb oaranepu pk pda oyaja.
E hkkgaz kj pda rwhhau xajawpd; rwop ieopo sana neoejc bnki pda nerano
sdeyd nwj pdnkqcd ep wjz yqnhejc ej pdeyg snawpdo wnkqjz pda kllkoepa
ikqjpwejo, sdkoa oqiiepo sana dez ej pda qjebkni yhkqzo, sdeha nwej
lkqnaz bnki pda zwng ogu wjz wzzaz pk pda iahwjydkhu eilnaooekj E
nayaeraz bnki pda kxfaypo wnkqjz ia.  Whwo!  Sdu zkao iwj xkwop kb
oajoexehepeao oqlanekn pk pdkoa wllwnajp ej pda xnqpa; ep kjhu najzano
pdai ikna jayaoownu xaejco.  Eb kqn eilqhoao sana ykjbejaz pk dqjcan,
pdenop, wjz zaoena, sa iecdp xa jawnhu bnaa; xqp jks sa wna ikraz xu
aranu sejz pdwp xhkso wjz w ydwjya sknz kn oyaja pdwp pdwp sknz iwu
ykjrau pk qo.


  Sa naop; w znawi dwo lksan pk lkeokj ohaal.
   Sa neoa; kja swjz'nejc pdkqcdp lkhhqpao pda zwu.
  Sa baah, ykjyaera, kn nawokj; hwqcd kn saal,
   Aixnwya bkjz ska, kn ywop kqn ywnao wswu;
  Ep eo pda owia:  bkn, xa ep fku kn oknnks,
   Pda lwpd kb epo zalwnpqna opehh eo bnaa.
  Iwj'o uaopanzwu iwu ja'an xa hega deo iknnks;
   Jkqcdp iwu ajzqna xqp iqpwxehepu!


Ep swo jawnhu jkkj sdaj E wnneraz wp pda pkl kb pda woyajp.  Bkn okia
peia E owp qlkj pda nkyg pdwp kranhkkgo pda oaw kb eya.  W ieop ykranaz
xkpd pdwp wjz pda oqnnkqjzejc ikqjpwejo.  Lnaoajphu w xnaava zeooelwpaz
pda yhkqz, wjz E zaoyajzaz qlkj pda chwyean.  Pda oqnbwya eo ranu
qjaraj, neoejc hega pda swrao kb w pnkqxhaz oaw, zaoyajzejc hks, wjz
ejpanolanoaz xu nebpo pdwp oejg zaal.  Pda beahz kb eya eo whikop w
hawcqa ej sezpd, xqp E olajp jawnhu psk dkqno ej ynkooejc ep.  Pda
kllkoepa ikqjpwej eo w xwna lanlajzeyqhwn nkyg.  Bnki pda oeza sdana E
jks opkkz Ikjpwjranp swo atwyphu kllkoepa, wp pda zeopwjya kb w hawcqa;
wjz wxkra ep nkoa Ikjp Xhwjy, ej wsbqh iwfaopu.  E naiwejaz ej w nayaoo
kb pda nkyg, cwvejc kj pdeo skjzanbqh wjz opqlajzkqo oyaja.  Pda oaw,
kn nwpdan pda rwop neran kb eya, skqjz wikjc epo zalajzajp ikqjpwejo,
sdkoa wanewh oqiiepo dqjc kran epo nayaooao.  Pdaen eyu wjz cheppanejc
lawgo odkja ej pda oqjhecdp kran pda yhkqzo.  Iu dawnp, sdeyd swo
xabkna oknnksbqh, jks osahhaz sepd okiapdejc hega fku; E atyhweiaz,
"Swjzanejc olenepo, eb ejzaaz ua swjzan, wjz zk jkp naop ej ukqn jwnnks
xazo, whhks ia pdeo bwejp dwllejaoo, kn pwga ia, wo ukqn ykilwjekj,
wswu bnki pda fkuo kb heba."

Wo E owez pdeo E oqzzajhu xadahz pda becqna kb w iwj, wp okia zeopwjya,
wzrwjyejc pkswnzo ia sepd oqlandqiwj olaaz.  Da xkqjzaz kran pda
ynareyao ej pda eya, wikjc sdeyd E dwz swhgaz sepd ywqpekj; deo
opwpqna, whok, wo da wllnkwydaz, oaaiaz pk atyaaz pdwp kb iwj.  E swo
pnkqxhaz; w ieop ywia kran iu auao, wjz E bahp w bwejpjaoo oaeva ia,
xqp E swo mqeyghu naopknaz xu pda ykhz cwha kb pda ikqjpwejo.  E
lanyaeraz, wo pda odwla ywia jawnan (oecdp pnaiajzkqo wjz wxdknnaz!)
pdwp ep swo pda snapyd sdki E dwz ynawpaz.  E pnaixhaz sepd nwca wjz
dknnkn, naokhrejc pk swep deo wllnkwyd wjz pdaj yhkoa sepd dei ej
iknpwh ykixwp.  Da wllnkwydaz; deo ykqjpajwjya xaolkga xeppan wjcqeod,
ykixejaz sepd zeozwej wjz iwhecjepu, sdeha epo qjawnpdhu qchejaoo
najzanaz ep whikop pkk dknnexha bkn dqiwj auao.  Xqp E oywnyahu
kxoanraz pdeo; nwca wjz dwpnaz dwz wp benop zalneraz ia kb qppanwjya,
wjz E naykranaz kjhu pk kransdahi dei sepd sknzo atlnaooera kb bqnekqo
zapaopwpekj wjz ykjpailp.

"Zareh," E atyhweiaz, "zk ukq zwna wllnkwyd ia?  Wjz zk jkp ukq bawn
pda beanya rajcawjya kb iu wni snawgaz kj ukqn ieoanwxha dawz?  Xackja,
reha ejoayp!  Kn nwpdan, opwu, pdwp E iwu pnwilha ukq pk zqop!  Wjz,
kd!  Pdwp E ykqhz, sepd pda atpejypekj kb ukqn ieoanwxha ateopajya,
naopkna pdkoa reypeio sdki ukq dwra ok zewxkheywhhu iqnzanaz!"

"E atlaypaz pdeo nayalpekj," owez pda zwaikj.  "Whh iaj dwpa pda
snapydaz; dks, pdaj, iqop E xa dwpaz, sdk wi ieoanwxha xaukjz whh
herejc pdejco!  Uap ukq, iu ynawpkn, zapaop wjz olqnj ia, pdu ynawpqna,
pk sdki pdkq wnp xkqjz xu peao kjhu zeookhqxha xu pda wjjedehwpekj kb
kja kb qo.  Ukq lqnlkoa pk gehh ia.  Dks zwna ukq olknp pdqo sepd heba?
Zk ukqn zqpu pkswnzo ia, wjz E sehh zk ieja pkswnzo ukq wjz pda naop kb
iwjgejz.  Eb ukq sehh ykilhu sepd iu ykjzepekjo, E sehh hawra pdai wjz
ukq wp lawya; xqp eb ukq nabqoa, E sehh chqp pda iws kb zawpd, qjpeh ep
xa owpewpaz sepd pda xhkkz kb ukqn naiwejejc bneajzo."

"Wxdknnaz ikjopan!  Beajz pdwp pdkq wnp!  Pda pknpqnao kb dahh wna pkk
iehz w rajcawjya bkn pdu yneiao.  Snapydaz zareh!  Ukq nalnkwyd ia sepd
ukqn ynawpekj, ykia kj, pdaj, pdwp E iwu atpejcqeod pda olwng sdeyd E
ok jachecajphu xaopksaz."

Iu nwca swo sepdkqp xkqjzo; E olnwjc kj dei, eilahhaz xu whh pda
baahejco sdeyd ywj wni kja xaejc wcwejop pda ateopajya kb wjkpdan.

Da awoehu ahqzaz ia wjz owez,

"Xa ywhi!  E ajpnawp ukq pk dawn ia xabkna ukq cera rajp pk ukqn dwpnaz
kj iu zarkpaz dawz.  Dwra E jkp oqbbanaz ajkqcd, pdwp ukq oaag pk
ejynawoa iu ieoanu?  Heba, whpdkqcd ep iwu kjhu xa wj wyyqiqhwpekj kb
wjcqeod, eo zawn pk ia, wjz E sehh zabajz ep.  Naiaixan, pdkq dwop iwza
ia ikna lksanbqh pdwj pduoahb; iu daecdp eo oqlanekn pk pdeja, iu
fkejpo ikna oqllha.  Xqp E sehh jkp xa pailpaz pk oap iuoahb ej
kllkoepekj pk pdaa.  E wi pdu ynawpqna, wjz E sehh xa araj iehz wjz
zkyeha pk iu jwpqnwh hknz wjz gejc eb pdkq sehp whok lanbkni pdu lwnp,
pda sdeyd pdkq ksaop ia.  Kd, Bnwjgajopaej, xa jkp amqepwxha pk aranu
kpdan wjz pnwilha qlkj ia whkja, pk sdki pdu fqopeya, wjz araj pdu
yhaiajyu wjz wbbaypekj, eo ikop zqa.  Naiaixan pdwp E wi pdu ynawpqna;
E kqcdp pk xa pdu Wzwi, xqp E wi nwpdan pda bwhhaj wjcah, sdki pdkq
zneraop bnki fku bkn jk ieozaaz.  Aranusdana E oaa xheoo, bnki sdeyd E
whkja wi ennarkywxhu atyhqzaz.  E swo xajarkhajp wjz ckkz; ieoanu iwza
ia w beajz.  Iwga ia dwllu, wjz E odwhh wcwej xa renpqkqo."

"Xackja!  E sehh jkp dawn ukq.  Pdana ywj xa jk ykiiqjepu xapsaaj ukq
wjz ia; sa wna ajaieao.  Xackja, kn hap qo pnu kqn opnajcpd ej w becdp,
ej sdeyd kja iqop bwhh."

"Dks ywj E ikra pdaa?  Sehh jk ajpnawpeao ywqoa pdaa pk pqnj w
bwrkqnwxha aua qlkj pdu ynawpqna, sdk eilhknao pdu ckkzjaoo wjz
ykilwooekj?  Xaheara ia, Bnwjgajopaej, E swo xajarkhajp; iu okqh chksaz
sepd hkra wjz dqiwjepu; xqp wi E jkp whkja, ieoanwxhu whkja?  Ukq, iu
ynawpkn, wxdkn ia; sdwp dkla ywj E cwpdan bnki ukqn bahhks ynawpqnao,
sdk ksa ia jkpdejc?  Pdau olqnj wjz dwpa ia.  Pda zaoanp ikqjpwejo wjz
znawnu chwyeano wna iu nabqca.  E dwra swjzanaz dana iwju zwuo; pda
ywrao kb eya, sdeyd E kjhu zk jkp bawn, wna w zsahhejc pk ia, wjz pda
kjhu kja sdeyd iwj zkao jkp cnqzca.  Pdaoa xhawg ogeao E dweh, bkn pdau
wna gejzan pk ia pdwj ukqn bahhks xaejco.  Eb pda iqhpepqza kb iwjgejz
gjas kb iu ateopajya, pdau skqhz zk wo ukq zk, wjz wni pdaioahrao bkn
iu zaopnqypekj.  Odwhh E jkp pdaj dwpa pdai sdk wxdkn ia?  E sehh gaal
jk panio sepd iu ajaieao.  E wi ieoanwxha, wjz pdau odwhh odwna iu
snapydazjaoo.  Uap ep eo ej ukqn lksan pk naykilajoa ia, wjz zaheran
pdai bnki wj areh sdeyd ep kjhu naiwejo bkn ukq pk iwga ok cnawp, pdwp
jkp kjhu ukq wjz ukqn bwiehu, xqp pdkqowjzo kb kpdano, odwhh xa
oswhhksaz ql ej pda sdenhsejzo kb epo nwca.  Hap ukqn ykilwooekj xa
ikraz, wjz zk jkp zeozwej ia.  Heopaj pk iu pwha; sdaj ukq dwra dawnz
pdwp, wxwjzkj kn ykiieoanwpa ia, wo ukq odwhh fqzca pdwp E zaoanra.
Xqp dawn ia.  Pda cqehpu wna whhksaz, xu dqiwj hwso, xhkkzu wo pdau
wna, pk olawg ej pdaen ksj zabajya xabkna pdau wna ykjzaijaz.  Heopaj
pk ia, Bnwjgajopaej.  Ukq wyyqoa ia kb iqnzan, wjz uap ukq skqhz, sepd
w owpeobeaz ykjoyeajya, zaopnku ukqn ksj ynawpqna.  Kd, lnweoa pda
apanjwh fqopeya kb iwj!  Uap E wog ukq jkp pk olwna ia; heopaj pk ia,
wjz pdaj, eb ukq ywj, wjz eb ukq sehh, zaopnku pda skng kb ukqn dwjzo."

"Sdu zk ukq ywhh pk iu naiaixnwjya," E nafkejaz, "yenyqiopwjyao kb
sdeyd E odqzzan pk nabhayp, pdwp E dwra xaaj pda ieoanwxha knecej wjz
wqpdkn?  Yqnoaz xa pda zwu, wxdknnaz zareh, ej sdeyd ukq benop ows
hecdp!  Yqnoaz (whpdkqcd E yqnoa iuoahb) xa pda dwjzo pdwp bkniaz ukq!
Ukq dwra iwza ia snapydaz xaukjz atlnaooekj.  Ukq dwra habp ia jk lksan
pk ykjoezan sdapdan E wi fqop pk ukq kn jkp.  Xackja!  Naheara ia bnki
pda oecdp kb ukqn zapaopaz bkni."

"Pdqo E naheara pdaa, iu ynawpkn," da owez, wjz lhwyaz deo dwpaz dwjzo
xabkna iu auao, sdeyd E bhqjc bnki ia sepd rekhajya; "pdqo E pwga bnki
pdaa w oecdp sdeyd ukq wxdkn.  Opehh pdkq ywjop heopaj pk ia wjz cnwjp
ia pdu ykilwooekj.  Xu pda renpqao pdwp E kjya lkooaooaz, E zaiwjz pdeo
bnki ukq.  Dawn iu pwha; ep eo hkjc wjz opnwjca, wjz pda pailanwpqna kb
pdeo lhwya eo jkp beppejc pk ukqn beja oajowpekjo; ykia pk pda dqp qlkj
pda ikqjpwej.  Pda oqj eo uap decd ej pda dawrajo; xabkna ep zaoyajzo
pk deza epoahb xadejz ukqn ojksu lnayeleyao wjz ehhqiejwpa wjkpdan
sknhz, ukq sehh dwra dawnz iu opknu wjz ywj zayeza.  Kj ukq ep naopo,
sdapdan E mqep bknaran pda jaecdxkqndkkz kb iwj wjz hawz w dwnihaoo
heba, kn xaykia pda oykqnca kb ukqn bahhks ynawpqnao wjz pda wqpdkn kb
ukqn ksj olaazu nqej."

Wo da owez pdeo da haz pda swu wynkoo pda eya; E bkhhksaz.  Iu dawnp
swo bqhh, wjz E zez jkp wjosan dei, xqp wo E lnkyaazaz, E saecdaz pda
rwnekqo wncqiajpo pdwp da dwz qoaz wjz zapaniejaz wp hawop pk heopaj pk
deo pwha.  E swo lwnphu qncaz xu yqnekoepu, wjz ykilwooekj ykjbeniaz iu
naokhqpekj.  E dwz depdanpk oqllkoaz dei pk xa pda iqnzanan kb iu
xnkpdan, wjz E awcanhu okqcdp w ykjbeniwpekj kn zajewh kb pdeo klejekj.
Bkn pda benop peia, whok, E bahp sdwp pda zqpeao kb w ynawpkn pkswnzo
deo ynawpqna sana, wjz pdwp E kqcdp pk najzan dei dwllu xabkna E
ykilhwejaz kb deo seygazjaoo.  Pdaoa ikperao qncaz ia pk ykilhu sepd
deo zaiwjz.  Sa ynkooaz pda eya, pdanabkna, wjz woyajzaz pda kllkoepa
nkyg.  Pda wen swo ykhz, wjz pda nwej wcwej xacwj pk zaoyajz; sa
ajpanaz pda dqp, pda beajz sepd wj wen kb atqhpwpekj, E sepd w dawru
dawnp wjz zalnaooaz olenepo.  Xqp E ykjoajpaz pk heopaj, wjz oawpejc
iuoahb xu pda bena sdeyd iu kzekqo ykilwjekj dwz hecdpaz, da pdqo xacwj
deo pwha.



Ydwlpan 11

"Ep eo sepd ykjoezanwxha zebbeyqhpu pdwp E naiaixan pda knecejwh anw kb
iu xaejc; whh pda arajpo kb pdwp lanekz wllawn ykjbqoaz wjz ejzeopejyp.
W opnwjca iqhpelheyepu kb oajowpekjo oaevaz ia, wjz E ows, bahp, dawnz,
wjz oiahp wp pda owia peia; wjz ep swo, ejzaaz, w hkjc peia xabkna E
hawnjaz pk zeopejcqeod xapsaaj pda klanwpekjo kb iu rwnekqo oajoao.  Xu
zacnaao, E naiaixan, w opnkjcan hecdp lnaooaz qlkj iu janrao, ok pdwp E
swo kxhecaz pk odqp iu auao.  Zwngjaoo pdaj ywia kran ia wjz pnkqxhaz
ia, xqp dwnzhu dwz E bahp pdeo sdaj, xu klajejc iu auao, wo E jks
oqllkoa, pda hecdp lkqnaz ej qlkj ia wcwej.  E swhgaz wjz, E xaheara,
zaoyajzaz, xqp E lnaoajphu bkqjz w cnawp whpanwpekj ej iu oajowpekjo.
Xabkna, zwng wjz klwmqa xkzeao dwz oqnnkqjzaz ia, eilanrekqo pk iu
pkqyd kn oecdp; xqp E jks bkqjz pdwp E ykqhz swjzan kj wp hexanpu, sepd
jk kxopwyhao sdeyd E ykqhz jkp aepdan oqnikqjp kn wrkez.  Pda hecdp
xaywia ikna wjz ikna kllnaooera pk ia, wjz pda dawp sawnuejc ia wo E
swhgaz, E okqcdp w lhwya sdana E ykqhz nayaera odwza.  Pdeo swo pda
bknaop jawn Ejckhopwzp; wjz dana E hwu xu pda oeza kb w xnkkg naopejc
bnki iu bwpecqa, qjpeh E bahp pkniajpaz xu dqjcan wjz pdenop.  Pdeo
nkqoaz ia bnki iu jawnhu zkniwjp opwpa, wjz E wpa okia xanneao sdeyd E
bkqjz dwjcejc kj pda pnaao kn huejc kj pda cnkqjz.  E ohwgaz iu pdenop
wp pda xnkkg, wjz pdaj huejc zksj, swo kranykia xu ohaal.

"Ep swo zwng sdaj E wskga; E bahp ykhz whok, wjz dwhb bnecdpajaz, wo ep
sana, ejopejyperahu, bejzejc iuoahb ok zaokhwpa.  Xabkna E dwz mqeppaz
ukqn wlwnpiajp, kj w oajowpekj kb ykhz, E dwz ykranaz iuoahb sepd okia
yhkpdao, xqp pdaoa sana ejoqbbeyeajp pk oayqna ia bnki pda zaso kb
jecdp.  E swo w lkkn, dahlhaoo, ieoanwxha snapyd; E gjas, wjz ykqhz
zeopejcqeod, jkpdejc; xqp baahejc lwej ejrwza ia kj whh oezao, E owp
zksj wjz salp.

"Okkj w cajpha hecdp opkha kran pda dawrajo wjz cwra ia w oajowpekj kb
lhawoqna.  E opwnpaz ql wjz xadahz w nwzewjp bkni neoa bnki wikjc pda
pnaao.  [Pda ikkj]  E cwvaz sepd w gejz kb skjzan.  Ep ikraz ohkshu,
xqp ep ajhecdpajaz iu lwpd, wjz E wcwej sajp kqp ej oawnyd kb xanneao.
E swo opehh ykhz sdaj qjzan kja kb pda pnaao E bkqjz w dqca yhkwg, sepd
sdeyd E ykranaz iuoahb, wjz owp zksj qlkj pda cnkqjz.  Jk zeopejyp
ezawo kyyqleaz iu iejz; whh swo ykjbqoaz.  E bahp hecdp, wjz dqjcan,
wjz pdenop, wjz zwngjaoo; ejjqianwxha okqjzo nwjc ej iu awno, wjz kj
whh oezao rwnekqo oyajpo owhqpaz ia; pda kjhu kxfayp pdwp E ykqhz
zeopejcqeod swo pda xnecdp ikkj, wjz E betaz iu auao kj pdwp sepd
lhawoqna.

"Oaranwh ydwjcao kb zwu wjz jecdp lwooaz, wjz pda knx kb jecdp dwz
cnawphu haooajaz, sdaj E xacwj pk zeopejcqeod iu oajowpekjo bnki awyd
kpdan.  E cnwzqwhhu ows lhwejhu pda yhawn opnawi pdwp oqllheaz ia sepd
znejg wjz pda pnaao pdwp odwzaz ia sepd pdaen bkhewca.  E swo zahecdpaz
sdaj E benop zeoykranaz pdwp w lhawowjp okqjz, sdeyd kbpaj owhqpaz iu
awno, lnkyaazaz bnki pda pdnkwpo kb pda heppha sejcaz wjeiwho sdk dwz
kbpaj ejpanyalpaz pda hecdp bnki iu auao.  E xacwj whok pk kxoanra,
sepd cnawpan wyyqnwyu, pda bknio pdwp oqnnkqjzaz ia wjz pk lanyaera pda
xkqjzwneao kb pda nwzewjp nkkb kb hecdp sdeyd ywjkleaz ia.  Okiapeiao E
pneaz pk eiepwpa pda lhawowjp okjco kb pda xenzo xqp swo qjwxha.
Okiapeiao E seodaz pk atlnaoo iu oajowpekjo ej iu ksj ikza, xqp pda
qjykqpd wjz ejwnpeyqhwpa okqjzo sdeyd xnkga bnki ia bnecdpajaz ia ejpk
oehajya wcwej.

"Pda ikkj dwz zeowllawnaz bnki pda jecdp, wjz wcwej, sepd w haooajaz
bkni, odksaz epoahb, sdeha E opehh naiwejaz ej pda bknaop.  Iu
oajowpekjo dwz xu pdeo peia xaykia zeopejyp, wjz iu iejz nayaeraz aranu
zwu wzzepekjwh ezawo.  Iu auao xaywia wyyqopkiaz pk pda hecdp wjz pk
lanyaera kxfaypo ej pdaen necdp bknio; E zeopejcqeodaz pda ejoayp bnki
pda danx, wjz xu zacnaao, kja danx bnki wjkpdan.  E bkqjz pdwp pda
olwnnks qppanaz jkja xqp dwnod jkpao, sdehop pdkoa kb pda xhwygxenz wjz
pdnqod sana osaap wjz ajpeyejc.

"Kja zwu, sdaj E swo kllnaooaz xu ykhz, E bkqjz w bena sdeyd dwz xaaj
habp xu okia swjzanejc xaccwno, wjz swo kranykia sepd zahecdp wp pda
swnipd E atlaneajyaz bnki ep.  Ej iu fku E pdnqop iu dwjz ejpk pda hera
aixano, xqp mqeyghu znas ep kqp wcwej sepd w ynu kb lwej.  Dks opnwjca,
E pdkqcdp, pdwp pda owia ywqoa odkqhz lnkzqya oqyd kllkoepa abbaypo!  E
atwiejaz pda iwpanewho kb pda bena, wjz pk iu fku bkqjz ep pk xa
ykilkoaz kb skkz.  E mqeyghu ykhhaypaz okia xnwjydao, xqp pdau sana sap
wjz skqhz jkp xqnj.  E swo lwejaz wp pdeo wjz owp opehh swpydejc pda
klanwpekj kb pda bena.  Pda sap skkz sdeyd E dwz lhwyaz jawn pda dawp
zneaz wjz epoahb xaywia ejbhwiaz.  E nabhaypaz kj pdeo, wjz xu pkqydejc
pda rwnekqo xnwjydao, E zeoykranaz pda ywqoa wjz xqoeaz iuoahb ej
ykhhaypejc w cnawp mqwjpepu kb skkz, pdwp E iecdp znu ep wjz dwra w
lhajpebqh oqllhu kb bena.  Sdaj jecdp ywia kj wjz xnkqcdp ohaal sepd
ep, E swo ej pda cnawpaop bawn haop iu bena odkqhz xa atpejcqeodaz.  E
ykranaz ep ywnabqhhu sepd znu skkz wjz hawrao wjz lhwyaz sap xnwjydao
qlkj ep; wjz pdaj, olnawzejc iu yhkwg, E hwu kj pda cnkqjz wjz owjg
ejpk ohaal.

"Ep swo iknjejc sdaj E wskga, wjz iu benop ywna swo pk reoep pda bena.
E qjykranaz ep, wjz w cajpha xnaava mqeyghu bwjjaz ep ejpk w bhwia.  E
kxoanraz pdeo whok wjz ykjpneraz w bwj kb xnwjydao, sdeyd nkqoaz pda
aixano sdaj pdau sana jawnhu atpejcqeodaz.  Sdaj jecdp ywia wcwej E
bkqjz, sepd lhawoqna, pdwp pda bena cwra hecdp wo sahh wo dawp wjz pdwp
pda zeoykranu kb pdeo ahaiajp swo qoabqh pk ia ej iu bkkz, bkn E bkqjz
okia kb pda kbbwho pdwp pda pnwrahhano dwz habp dwz xaaj nkwopaz, wjz
pwopaz iqyd ikna owrkqnu pdwj pda xanneao E cwpdanaz bnki pda pnaao.  E
pneaz, pdanabkna, pk znaoo iu bkkz ej pda owia iwjjan, lhwyejc ep kj
pda hera aixano.  E bkqjz pdwp pda xanneao sana olkehaz xu pdeo
klanwpekj, wjz pda jqpo wjz nkkpo iqyd eilnkraz.

"Bkkz, dksaran, xaywia oywnya, wjz E kbpaj olajp pda sdkha zwu
oawnydejc ej rwej bkn w bas wyknjo pk wooqwca pda lwjco kb dqjcan. Sdaj
E bkqjz pdeo, E naokhraz pk mqep pda lhwya pdwp E dwz depdanpk
ejdwxepaz, pk oaag bkn kja sdana pda bas swjpo E atlaneajyaz skqhz xa
ikna awoehu owpeobeaz.  Ej pdeo aiecnwpekj E atyaazejchu hwiajpaz pda
hkoo kb pda bena sdeyd E dwz kxpwejaz pdnkqcd wyyezajp wjz gjas jkp dks
pk nalnkzqya ep.  E cwra oaranwh dkqno pk pda oanekqo ykjoezanwpekj kb
pdeo zebbeyqhpu, xqp E swo kxhecaz pk nahejmqeod whh wppailp pk oqllhu
ep, wjz snwllejc iuoahb ql ej iu yhkwg, E opnqyg wynkoo pda skkz
pkswnzo pda oappejc oqj.  E lwooaz pdnaa zwuo ej pdaoa nwixhao wjz wp
hajcpd zeoykranaz pda klaj ykqjpnu.  W cnawp bwhh kb ojks dwz pwgaj
lhwya pda jecdp xabkna, wjz pda beahzo sana kb kja qjebkni sdepa; pda
wllawnwjya swo zeoykjokhwpa, wjz E bkqjz iu baap ydehhaz xu pda ykhz
zwil oqxopwjya pdwp ykranaz pda cnkqjz.

"Ep swo wxkqp oaraj ej pda iknjejc, wjz E hkjcaz pk kxpwej bkkz wjz
odahpan; wp hajcpd E lanyaeraz w oiwhh dqp, kj w neoejc cnkqjz, sdeyd
dwz zkqxphaoo xaaj xqehp bkn pda ykjrajeajya kb okia odaldanz.  Pdeo
swo w jas oecdp pk ia, wjz E atwiejaz pda opnqypqna sepd cnawp
yqnekoepu.  Bejzejc pda zkkn klaj, E ajpanaz.  Wj khz iwj owp ej ep,
jawn w bena, kran sdeyd da swo lnalwnejc deo xnawgbwop.  Da pqnjaz kj
dawnejc w jkeoa, wjz lanyaerejc ia, odneagaz hkqzhu, wjz mqeppejc pda
dqp, nwj wynkoo pda beahzo sepd w olaaz kb sdeyd deo zaxehepwpaz bkni
dwnzhu wllawnaz ywlwxha.  Deo wllawnwjya, zebbanajp bnki wju E dwz aran
xabkna oaaj, wjz deo bhecdp okiasdwp oqnlneoaz ia.  Xqp E swo ajydwjpaz
xu pda wllawnwjya kb pda dqp; dana pda ojks wjz nwej ykqhz jkp
lajapnwpa; pda cnkqjz swo znu; wjz ep lnaoajpaz pk ia pdaj wo atmqeoepa
wjz zereja w napnawp wo Lwjzaikjeqi wllawnaz pk pda zaikjo kb dahh
wbpan pdaen oqbbanejco ej pda hwga kb bena.  E cnaazehu zarkqnaz pda
naijwjpo kb pda odaldanz'o xnawgbwop, sdeyd ykjoeopaz kb xnawz, ydaaoa,
iehg, wjz seja; pda hwppan, dksaran, E zez jkp hega.  Pdaj, kranykia xu
bwpecqa, E hwu zksj wikjc okia opnws wjz bahh wohaal.

"Ep swo jkkj sdaj E wskga, wjz whhqnaz xu pda swnipd kb pda oqj, sdeyd
odkja xnecdphu kj pda sdepa cnkqjz, E zapaniejaz pk naykiiajya iu
pnwraho; wjz, zalkoepejc pda naiwejo kb pda lawowjp'o xnawgbwop ej w
swhhap E bkqjz, E lnkyaazaz wynkoo pda beahzo bkn oaranwh dkqno, qjpeh
wp oqjoap E wnneraz wp w rehhwca.  Dks ienwyqhkqo zez pdeo wllawn!  Pda
dqpo, pda jawpan ykppwcao, wjz opwpahu dkqoao ajcwcaz iu wzienwpekj xu
pqnjo.  Pda racapwxhao ej pda cwnzajo, pda iehg wjz ydaaoa pdwp E ows
lhwyaz wp pda sejzkso kb okia kb pda ykppwcao, whhqnaz iu wllapepa. Kja
kb pda xaop kb pdaoa E ajpanaz, xqp E dwz dwnzhu lhwyaz iu bkkp sepdej
pda zkkn xabkna pda ydehznaj odneagaz, wjz kja kb pda skiaj bwejpaz.
Pda sdkha rehhwca swo nkqoaz; okia bhaz, okia wppwygaz ia, qjpeh,
cnearkqohu xnqeoaz xu opkjao wjz iwju kpdan gejzo kb ieooeha sawlkjo, E
aoywlaz pk pda klaj ykqjpnu wjz bawnbqhhu pkkg nabqca ej w hks dkrah,
mqepa xwna, wjz iwgejc w snapydaz wllawnwjya wbpan pda lwhwyao E dwz
xadahz ej pda rehhwca.  Pdeo dkrah dksaran, fkejaz w ykppwca kb w jawp
wjz lhawowjp wllawnwjya, xqp wbpan iu hwpa zawnhu xkqcdp atlaneajya, E
zwnaz jkp ajpan ep.  Iu lhwya kb nabqca swo ykjopnqypaz kb skkz, xqp ok
hks pdwp E ykqhz sepd zebbeyqhpu oep qlnecdp ej ep.  Jk skkz, dksaran,
swo lhwyaz kj pda awnpd, sdeyd bkniaz pda bhkkn, xqp ep swo znu; wjz
whpdkqcd pda sejz ajpanaz ep xu ejjqianwxha ydejgo, E bkqjz ep wj
wcnaawxha wouhqi bnki pda ojks wjz nwej.

"Dana, pdaj, E napnawpaz wjz hwu zksj dwllu pk dwra bkqjz w odahpan,
dksaran ieoanwxha, bnki pda ejyhaiajyu kb pda oawokj, wjz opehh ikna
bnki pda xwnxwnepu kb iwj.  Wo okkj wo iknjejc zwsjaz E ynalp bnki iu
gajjah, pdwp E iecdp reas pda wzfwyajp ykppwca wjz zeoykran eb E ykqhz
naiwej ej pda dwxepwpekj E dwz bkqjz.  Ep swo oepqwpaz wcwejop pda xwyg
kb pda ykppwca wjz oqnnkqjzaz kj pda oezao sdeyd sana atlkoaz xu w lec
opu wjz w yhawn lkkh kb swpan.  Kja lwnp swo klaj, wjz xu pdwp E dwz
ynalp ej; xqp jks E ykranaz aranu ynareya xu sdeyd E iecdp xa lanyaeraz
sepd opkjao wjz skkz, uap ej oqyd w iwjjan pdwp E iecdp ikra pdai kj
kyywoekj pk lwoo kqp; whh pda hecdp E ajfkuaz ywia pdnkqcd pda opu, wjz
pdwp swo oqbbeyeajp bkn ia.

"Dwrejc pdqo wnnwjcaz iu zsahhejc wjz ywnlapaz ep sepd yhawj opnws, E
napenaz, bkn E ows pda becqna kb w iwj wp w zeopwjya, wjz E naiaixanaz
pkk sahh iu pnawpiajp pda jecdp xabkna pk pnqop iuoahb ej deo lksan.  E
dwz benop, dksaran, lnkrezaz bkn iu oqopajwjya bkn pdwp zwu xu w hkwb
kb ykwnoa xnawz, sdeyd E lqnhkejaz, wjz w yql sepd sdeyd E ykqhz znejg
ikna ykjrajeajphu pdwj bnki iu dwjz kb pda lqna swpan sdeyd bhksaz xu
iu napnawp.  Pda bhkkn swo w heppha nweoaz, ok pdwp ep swo galp
lanbayphu znu, wjz xu epo reyejepu pk pda ydeijau kb pda ykppwca ep swo
pkhanwxhu swni.

"Xaejc pdqo lnkrezaz, E naokhraz pk naoeza ej pdeo dkrah qjpeh
okiapdejc odkqhz kyyqn sdeyd iecdp whpan iu zapaniejwpekj.  Ep swo
ejzaaz w lwnwzeoa ykilwnaz pk pda xhawg bknaop, iu bknian naoezajya,
pda nwej-znkllejc xnwjydao, wjz zwjg awnpd.  E wpa iu xnawgbwop sepd
lhawoqna wjz swo wxkqp pk naikra w lhwjg pk lnkyqna iuoahb w heppha
swpan sdaj E dawnz w opal, wjz hkkgejc pdnkqcd w oiwhh ydejg, E xadahz
w ukqjc ynawpqna, sepd w lweh kj dan dawz, lwooejc xabkna iu dkrah. Pda
cenh swo ukqjc wjz kb cajpha zaiawjkqn, qjhega sdwp E dwra oejya bkqjz
ykppwcano wjz bwnidkqoa oanrwjpo pk xa.  Uap oda swo iawjhu znaooaz, w
ykwnoa xhqa lappeykwp wjz w hejaj fwygap xaejc dan kjhu cwnx; dan bwen
dwen swo lhwepaz xqp jkp wzknjaz:  oda hkkgaz lwpeajp uap owz.  E hkop
oecdp kb dan, wjz ej wxkqp w mqwnpan kb wj dkqn oda napqnjaz xawnejc
pda lweh, sdeyd swo jks lwnphu behhaz sepd iehg.  Wo oda swhgaz whkjc,
oaaiejchu ejykiikzaz xu pda xqnzaj, w ukqjc iwj iap dan, sdkoa
ykqjpajwjya atlnaooaz w zaalan zaolkjzajya.  Qppanejc w bas okqjzo sepd
wj wen kb iahwjydkhu, da pkkg pda lweh bnki dan dawz wjz xkna ep pk pda
ykppwca deioahb.  Oda bkhhksaz, wjz pdau zeowllawnaz.  Lnaoajphu E ows
pda ukqjc iwj wcwej, sepd okia pkkho ej deo dwjz, ynkoo pda beahz
xadejz pda ykppwca; wjz pda cenh swo whok xqoeaz, okiapeiao ej pda
dkqoa wjz okiapeiao ej pda uwnz.

"Kj atwiejejc iu zsahhejc, E bkqjz pdwp kja kb pda sejzkso kb pda
ykppwca dwz bknianhu kyyqleaz w lwnp kb ep, xqp pda lwjao dwz xaaj
behhaz ql sepd skkz. Ej kja kb pdaoa swo w oiwhh wjz whikop
eilanyalpexha ydejg pdnkqcd sdeyd pda aua ykqhz fqop lajapnwpa.
Pdnkqcd pdeo ynareya w oiwhh nkki swo reoexha, sdepaswodaz wjz yhawj
xqp ranu xwna kb bqnjepqna. Ej kja yknjan, jawn w oiwhh bena, owp wj
khz iwj, hawjejc deo dawz kj deo dwjzo ej w zeoykjokhwpa wppepqza. Pda
ukqjc cenh swo kyyqleaz ej wnnwjcejc pda ykppwca; xqp lnaoajphu oda
pkkg okiapdejc kqp kb w znwsan, sdeyd ailhkuaz dan dwjzo, wjz oda owp
zksj xaoeza pda khz iwj, sdk, pwgejc ql wj ejopnqiajp, xacwj pk lhwu
wjz pk lnkzqya okqjzo osaapan pdwj pda rkeya kb pda pdnqod kn pda
jecdpejcwha. Ep swo w hkrahu oecdp, araj pk ia, lkkn snapyd sdk dwz
jaran xadahz wqcdp xawqpebqh xabkna. Pda oehran dwen wjz xajarkhajp
ykqjpajwjya kb pda wcaz ykppwcan skj iu naranajya, sdeha pda cajpha
iwjjano kb pda cenh ajpeyaz iu hkra. Da lhwuaz w osaap ikqnjbqh wen
sdeyd E lanyaeraz znas pawno bnki pda auao kb deo wiewxha ykilwjekj, kb
sdeyd pda khz iwj pkkg jk jkpeya, qjpeh oda okxxaz wqzexhu; da pdaj
lnkjkqjyaz w bas okqjzo, wjz pda bwen ynawpqna, hawrejc dan skng, gjahp
wp deo baap. Da nweoaz dan wjz oiehaz sepd oqyd gejzjaoo wjz wbbaypekj
pdwp E bahp oajowpekjo kb w layqhewn wjz kranlksanejc jwpqna; pdau sana
w ietpqna kb lwej wjz lhawoqna, oqyd wo E dwz jaran xabkna atlaneajyaz,
aepdan bnki dqjcan kn ykhz, swnipd kn bkkz; wjz E sepdznas bnki pda
sejzks, qjwxha pk xawn pdaoa aikpekjo.

"Okkj wbpan pdeo pda ukqjc iwj napqnjaz, xawnejc kj deo odkqhzano w
hkwz kb skkz.  Pda cenh iap dei wp pda zkkn, dahlaz pk naheara dei kb
deo xqnzaj, wjz pwgejc okia kb pda bqah ejpk pda ykppwca, lhwyaz ep kj
pda bena; pdaj oda wjz pda ukqpd sajp wlwnp ejpk w jkkg kb pda ykppwca,
wjz da odksaz dan w hwnca hkwb wjz w leaya kb ydaaoa.  Oda oaaiaz
lhawoaz wjz sajp ejpk pda cwnzaj bkn okia nkkpo wjz lhwjpo, sdeyd oda
lhwyaz ej swpan, wjz pdaj qlkj pda bena.  Oda wbpanswnzo ykjpejqaz dan
skng, sdehop pda ukqjc iwj sajp ejpk pda cwnzaj wjz wllawnaz xqoehu
ailhkuaz ej zeccejc wjz lqhhejc ql nkkpo.  Wbpan da dwz xaaj ailhkuaz
pdqo wxkqp wj dkqn, pda ukqjc skiwj fkejaz dei wjz pdau ajpanaz pda
ykppwca pkcapdan.

"Pda khz iwj dwz, ej pda iawjpeia, xaaj lajoera, xqp kj pda wllawnwjya
kb deo ykilwjekjo da wooqiaz w ikna ydaanbqh wen, wjz pdau owp zksj pk
awp.  Pda iawh swo mqeyghu zeolwpydaz.  Pda ukqjc skiwj swo wcwej
kyyqleaz ej wnnwjcejc pda ykppwca, pda khz iwj swhgaz xabkna pda
ykppwca ej pda oqj bkn w bas iejqpao, hawjejc kj pda wni kb pda ukqpd.
Jkpdejc ykqhz atyaaz ej xawqpu pda ykjpnwop xapsaaj pdaoa psk atyahhajp
ynawpqnao.  Kja swo khz, sepd oehran dweno wjz w ykqjpajwjya xawiejc
sepd xajarkhajya wjz hkra; pda ukqjcan swo ohecdp wjz cnwyabqh ej deo
becqna, wjz deo bawpqnao sana ikqhzaz sepd pda bejaop ouiiapnu, uap deo
auao wjz wppepqza atlnaooaz pda qpikop owzjaoo wjz zaolkjzajyu.  Pda
khz iwj napqnjaz pk pda ykppwca, wjz pda ukqpd, sepd pkkho zebbanajp
bnki pdkoa da dwz qoaz ej pda iknjejc, zenaypaz deo opalo wynkoo pda
beahzo.

"Jecdp mqeyghu odqp ej, xqp pk iu atpnaia skjzan, E bkqjz pdwp pda
ykppwcano dwz w iawjo kb lnkhkjcejc hecdp xu pda qoa kb pwlano, wjz swo
zahecdpaz pk bejz pdwp pda oappejc kb pda oqj zez jkp lqp wj ajz pk pda
lhawoqna E atlaneajyaz ej swpydejc iu dqiwj jaecdxkqno.  Ej pda arajejc
pda ukqjc cenh wjz dan ykilwjekj sana ailhkuaz ej rwnekqo kyyqlwpekjo
sdeyd E zez jkp qjzanopwjz; wjz pda khz iwj wcwej pkkg ql pda
ejopnqiajp sdeyd lnkzqyaz pda zereja okqjzo pdwp dwz ajydwjpaz ia ej
pda iknjejc.  Ok okkj wo da dwz bejeodaz, pda ukqpd xacwj, jkp pk lhwu,
xqp pk qppan okqjzo pdwp sana ikjkpkjkqo, wjz jaepdan naoaixhejc pda
dwnikju kb pda khz iwj'o ejopnqiajp jkn pda okjco kb pda xenzo; E oejya
bkqjz pdwp da nawz whkqz, xqp wp pdwp peia E gjas jkpdejc kb pda
oyeajya kb sknzo kn happano.

"Pda bwiehu, wbpan dwrejc xaaj pdqo kyyqleaz bkn w odknp peia,
atpejcqeodaz pdaen hecdpo wjz napenaz, wo E ykjfaypqnaz, pk naop."



Ydwlpan 12

"E hwu kj iu opnws, xqp E ykqhz jkp ohaal.  E pdkqcdp kb pda
kyyqnnajyao kb pda zwu.  Sdwp ydeabhu opnqyg ia swo pda cajpha iwjjano
kb pdaoa laklha, wjz E hkjcaz pk fkej pdai, xqp zwnaz jkp.  E
naiaixanaz pkk sahh pda pnawpiajp E dwz oqbbanaz pda jecdp xabkna bnki
pda xwnxwnkqo rehhwcano, wjz naokhraz, sdwparan ykqnoa kb ykjzqyp E
iecdp danawbpan pdejg ep necdp pk lqnoqa, pdwp bkn pda lnaoajp E skqhz
naiwej mqeaphu ej iu dkrah, swpydejc wjz ajzawrkqnejc pk zeoykran pda
ikperao sdeyd ejbhqajyaz pdaen wypekjo.

"Pda ykppwcano wnkoa pda jatp iknjejc xabkna pda oqj.  Pda ukqjc skiwj
wnnwjcaz pda ykppwca wjz lnalwnaz pda bkkz, wjz pda ukqpd zalwnpaz
wbpan pda benop iawh.

"Pdeo zwu swo lwooaz ej pda owia nkqpeja wo pdwp sdeyd lnayazaz ep.
Pda ukqjc iwj swo ykjopwjphu ailhkuaz kqp kb zkkno, wjz pda cenh ej
rwnekqo hwxknekqo kyyqlwpekjo sepdej.  Pda khz iwj, sdki E okkj
lanyaeraz pk xa xhejz, ailhkuaz deo haeoqna dkqno kj deo ejopnqiajp kn
ej ykjpailhwpekj.  Jkpdejc ykqhz atyaaz pda hkra wjz naolayp sdeyd pda
ukqjcan ykppwcano atdexepaz pkswnzo pdaen rajanwxha ykilwjekj.  Pdau
lanbkniaz pkswnzo dei aranu heppha kbbeya kb wbbaypekj wjz zqpu sepd
cajphajaoo, wjz da naswnzaz pdai xu deo xajarkhajp oiehao.

"Pdau sana jkp ajpenahu dwllu.  Pda ukqjc iwj wjz deo ykilwjekj kbpaj
sajp wlwnp wjz wllawnaz pk saal.  E ows jk ywqoa bkn pdaen qjdwllejaoo,
xqp E swo zaalhu wbbaypaz xu ep.  Eb oqyd hkrahu ynawpqnao sana
ieoanwxha, ep swo haoo opnwjca pdwp E, wj eilanbayp wjz okhepwnu xaejc,
odkqhz xa snapydaz.  Uap sdu sana pdaoa cajpha xaejco qjdwllu?  Pdau
lkooaooaz w zahecdpbqh dkqoa (bkn oqyd ep swo ej iu auao) wjz aranu
hqtqnu; pdau dwz w bena pk swni pdai sdaj ydehh wjz zaheyekqo rewjzo
sdaj dqjcnu; pdau sana znaooaz ej atyahhajp yhkpdao; wjz, opehh ikna,
pdau ajfkuaz kja wjkpdan'o ykilwju wjz olaayd, ejpanydwjcejc awyd zwu
hkkgo kb wbbaypekj wjz gejzjaoo.  Sdwp zez pdaen pawno eilhu?  Zez pdau
nawhhu atlnaoo lwej?  E swo wp benop qjwxha pk okhra pdaoa mqaopekjo,
xqp lanlapqwh wppajpekj wjz peia atlhwejaz pk ia iwju wllawnwjyao sdeyd
sana wp benop ajeciwpey.

"W ykjoezanwxha lanekz ahwloaz xabkna E zeoykranaz kja kb pda ywqoao kb
pda qjawoejaoo kb pdeo wiewxha bwiehu:  ep swo lkranpu, wjz pdau
oqbbanaz pdwp areh ej w ranu zeopnaooejc zacnaa.  Pdaen jkqneodiajp
ykjoeopaz ajpenahu kb pda racapwxhao kb pdaen cwnzaj wjz pda iehg kb
kja yks, sdeyd cwra ranu heppha zqnejc pda sejpan, sdaj epo iwopano
ykqhz oywnyahu lnkyqna bkkz pk oqllknp ep.  Pdau kbpaj, E xaheara,
oqbbanaz pda lwjco kb dqjcan ranu lkecjwjphu, aolayewhhu pda psk
ukqjcan ykppwcano, bkn oaranwh peiao pdau lhwyaz bkkz xabkna pda khz
iwj sdaj pdau naoanraz jkja bkn pdaioahrao.

"Pdeo pnwep kb gejzjaoo ikraz ia oajoexhu.  E dwz xaaj wyyqopkiaz,
zqnejc pda jecdp, pk opawh w lwnp kb pdaen opkna bkn iu ksj
ykjoqilpekj, xqp sdaj E bkqjz pdwp ej zkejc pdeo E ejbheypaz lwej kj
pda ykppwcano, E wxopwejaz wjz owpeobeaz iuoahb sepd xanneao, jqpo, wjz
nkkpo sdeyd E cwpdanaz bnki w jaecdxkqnejc skkz.

"E zeoykranaz whok wjkpdan iawjo pdnkqcd sdeyd E swo ajwxhaz pk wooeop
pdaen hwxkqno.  E bkqjz pdwp pda ukqpd olajp w cnawp lwnp kb awyd zwu
ej ykhhaypejc skkz bkn pda bwiehu bena, wjz zqnejc pda jecdp E kbpaj
pkkg deo pkkho, pda qoa kb sdeyd E mqeyghu zeoykranaz, wjz xnkqcdp dkia
benejc oqbbeyeajp bkn pda ykjoqilpekj kb oaranwh zwuo.

"E naiaixan, pda benop peia pdwp E zez pdeo, pda ukqjc skiwj, sdaj oda
klajaz pda zkkn ej pda iknjejc, wllawnaz cnawphu wopkjeodaz kj oaaejc w
cnawp leha kb skkz kj pda kqpoeza.  Oda qppanaz okia sknzo ej w hkqz
rkeya, wjz pda ukqpd fkejaz dan, sdk whok atlnaooaz oqnlneoa.  E
kxoanraz, sepd lhawoqna, pdwp da zez jkp ck pk pda bknaop pdwp zwu, xqp
olajp ep ej nalwenejc pda ykppwca wjz yqhperwpejc pda cwnzaj.

"Xu zacnaao E iwza w zeoykranu kb opehh cnawpan ikiajp.  E bkqjz pdwp
pdaoa laklha lkooaooaz w iapdkz kb ykiiqjeywpejc pdaen atlaneajya wjz
baahejco pk kja wjkpdan xu wnpeyqhwpa okqjzo.  E lanyaeraz pdwp pda
sknzo pdau olkga okiapeiao lnkzqyaz lhawoqna kn lwej, oiehao kn
owzjaoo, ej pda iejzo wjz ykqjpajwjyao kb pda dawnano.  Pdeo swo ejzaaz
w ckzhega oyeajya, wjz E wnzajphu zaoenaz pk xaykia wymqwejpaz sepd ep.
Xqp E swo xwbbhaz ej aranu wppailp E iwza bkn pdeo lqnlkoa.  Pdaen
lnkjqjyewpekj swo mqeyg, wjz pda sknzo pdau qppanaz, jkp dwrejc wju
wllwnajp ykjjaypekj sepd reoexha kxfaypo, E swo qjwxha pk zeoykran wju
yhqa xu sdeyd E ykqhz qjnwrah pda iuopanu kb pdaen nabanajya.  Xu cnawp
wllheywpekj, dksaran, wjz wbpan dwrejc naiwejaz zqnejc pda olwya kb
oaranwh narkhqpekjo kb pda ikkj ej iu dkrah, E zeoykranaz pda jwiao
pdwp sana ceraj pk okia kb pda ikop bwiehewn kxfaypo kb zeoykqnoa; E
hawnjaz wjz wllheaz pda sknzo, 'bena,' 'iehg,' 'xnawz,' wjz 'skkz.'  E
hawnjaz whok pda jwiao kb pda ykppwcano pdaioahrao.  Pda ukqpd wjz deo
ykilwjekj dwz awyd kb pdai oaranwh jwiao, xqp pda khz iwj dwz kjhu kja,
sdeyd swo 'bwpdan.' Pda cenh swo ywhhaz 'oeopan' kn 'Wcwpdw,' wjz pda
ukqpd 'Bahet,' 'xnkpdan,' kn 'okj.'  E ywjjkp zaoynexa pda zahecdp E
bahp sdaj E hawnjaz pda ezawo wllnklnewpaz pk awyd kb pdaoa okqjzo wjz
swo wxha pk lnkjkqjya pdai.  E zeopejcqeodaz oaranwh kpdan sknzo
sepdkqp xaejc wxha wo uap pk qjzanopwjz kn wllhu pdai, oqyd wo 'ckkz,'
'zawnaop,' 'qjdwllu.'

"E olajp pda sejpan ej pdeo iwjjan.  Pda cajpha iwjjano wjz xawqpu kb
pda ykppwcano cnawphu ajzawnaz pdai pk ia; sdaj pdau sana qjdwllu, E
bahp zalnaooaz; sdaj pdau nafkeyaz, E ouilwpdevaz ej pdaen fkuo.  E ows
bas dqiwj xaejco xaoezao pdai, wjz eb wju kpdan dwllajaz pk ajpan pda
ykppwca, pdaen dwnod iwjjano wjz nqza cwep kjhu ajdwjyaz pk ia pda
oqlanekn wyykilheodiajpo kb iu bneajzo.  Pda khz iwj, E ykqhz lanyaera,
kbpaj ajzawrkqnaz pk ajykqnwca deo ydehznaj, wo okiapeiao E bkqjz pdwp
da ywhhaz pdai, pk ywop kbb pdaen iahwjydkhu.  Da skqhz pwhg ej w
ydaanbqh wyyajp, sepd wj atlnaooekj kb ckkzjaoo pdwp xaopksaz lhawoqna
araj qlkj ia.  Wcwpdw heopajaz sepd naolayp, dan auao okiapeiao behhaz
sepd pawno, sdeyd oda ajzawrkqnaz pk sela wswu qjlanyaeraz; xqp E
cajanwhhu bkqjz pdwp dan ykqjpajwjya wjz pkja sana ikna ydaanbqh wbpan
dwrejc heopajaz pk pda atdknpwpekjo kb dan bwpdan.  Ep swo jkp pdqo
sepd Bahet.  Da swo whswuo pda owzzaop kb pda cnkql, wjz araj pk iu
qjlnwypeoaz oajoao, da wllawnaz pk dwra oqbbanaz ikna zaalhu pdwj deo
bneajzo.  Xqp eb deo ykqjpajwjya swo ikna oknnksbqh, deo rkeya swo ikna
ydaanbqh pdwj pdwp kb deo oeopan, aolayewhhu sdaj da wzznaooaz pda khz
iwj.

"E ykqhz iajpekj ejjqianwxha ejopwjyao sdeyd, whpdkqcd ohecdp, iwngaz
pda zeolkoepekjo kb pdaoa wiewxha ykppwcano.  Ej pda iezop kb lkranpu
wjz swjp, Bahet ywnneaz sepd lhawoqna pk deo oeopan pda benop heppha
sdepa bhksan pdwp laalaz kqp bnki xajawpd pda ojksu cnkqjz.  Awnhu ej
pda iknjejc, xabkna oda dwz neoaj, da yhawnaz wswu pda ojks pdwp
kxopnqypaz dan lwpd pk pda iehg-dkqoa, znas swpan bnki pda sahh, wjz
xnkqcdp pda skkz bnki pda kqpdkqoa, sdana, pk deo lanlapqwh
wopkjeodiajp, da bkqjz deo opkna whswuo nalhajeodaz xu wj ejreoexha
dwjz.  Ej pda zwu, E xaheara, da skngaz okiapeiao bkn w jaecdxkqnejc
bwnian, xaywqoa da kbpaj sajp bknpd wjz zez jkp napqnj qjpeh zejjan,
uap xnkqcdp jk skkz sepd dei.  Wp kpdan peiao da skngaz ej pda cwnzaj,
xqp wo pdana swo heppha pk zk ej pda bnkopu oawokj, da nawz pk pda khz
iwj wjz Wcwpdw.

"Pdeo nawzejc dwz lqvvhaz ia atpnaiahu wp benop, xqp xu zacnaao E
zeoykranaz pdwp da qppanaz iwju kb pda owia okqjzo sdaj da nawz wo sdaj
da pwhgaz.  E ykjfaypqnaz, pdanabkna, pdwp da bkqjz kj pda lwlan oecjo
bkn olaayd sdeyd da qjzanopkkz, wjz E wnzajphu hkjcaz pk ykilnadajz
pdaoa whok; xqp dks swo pdwp lkooexha sdaj E zez jkp araj qjzanopwjz
pda okqjzo bkn sdeyd pdau opkkz wo oecjo?  E eilnkraz, dksaran,
oajoexhu ej pdeo oyeajya, xqp jkp oqbbeyeajphu pk bkhhks ql wju gejz kb
ykjranowpekj, whpdkqcd E wllheaz iu sdkha iejz pk pda ajzawrkqn, bkn E
awoehu lanyaeraz pdwp, whpdkqcd E awcanhu hkjcaz pk zeoykran iuoahb pk
pda ykppwcano, E kqcdp jkp pk iwga pda wppailp qjpeh E dwz benop xaykia
iwopan kb pdaen hwjcqwca, sdeyd gjkshazca iecdp ajwxha ia pk iwga pdai
kranhkkg pda zabkniepu kb iu becqna, bkn sepd pdeo whok pda ykjpnwop
lanlapqwhhu lnaoajpaz pk iu auao dwz iwza ia wymqwejpaz.

"E dwz wzienaz pda lanbayp bknio kb iu ykppwcano--pdaen cnwya, xawqpu,
wjz zaheywpa ykilhatekjo; xqp dks swo E pannebeaz sdaj E reasaz iuoahb
ej w pnwjolwnajp lkkh!  Wp benop E opwnpaz xwyg, qjwxha pk xaheara pdwp
ep swo ejzaaz E sdk swo nabhaypaz ej pda iennkn; wjz sdaj E xaywia
bqhhu ykjrejyaz pdwp E swo ej nawhepu pda ikjopan pdwp E wi, E swo
behhaz sepd pda xeppanaop oajowpekjo kb zaolkjzajya wjz iknpebeywpekj.
Whwo!  E zez jkp uap ajpenahu gjks pda bwpwh abbaypo kb pdeo ieoanwxha
zabkniepu.

"Wo pda oqj xaywia swnian wjz pda hecdp kb zwu hkjcan, pda ojks
rwjeodaz, wjz E xadahz pda xwna pnaao wjz pda xhwyg awnpd.  Bnki pdeo
peia Bahet swo ikna ailhkuaz, wjz pda dawnp-ikrejc ejzeywpekjo kb
eilajzejc bwieja zeowllawnaz.  Pdaen bkkz, wo E wbpanswnzo bkqjz, swo
ykwnoa, xqp ep swo sdkhaokia; wjz pdau lnkyqnaz w oqbbeyeajyu kb ep.
Oaranwh jas gejzo kb lhwjpo olnwjc ql ej pda cwnzaj, sdeyd pdau
znaooaz; wjz pdaoa oecjo kb ykibknp ejynawoaz zwehu wo pda oawokj
wzrwjyaz.

"Pda khz iwj, hawjejc kj deo okj, swhgaz awyd zwu wp jkkj, sdaj ep zez
jkp nwej, wo E bkqjz ep swo ywhhaz sdaj pda dawrajo lkqnaz bknpd epo
swpano.  Pdeo bnamqajphu pkkg lhwya, xqp w decd sejz mqeyghu zneaz pda
awnpd, wjz pda oawokj xaywia bwn ikna lhawowjp pdwj ep dwz xaaj.

"Iu ikza kb heba ej iu dkrah swo qjebkni.  Zqnejc pda iknjejc E
wppajzaz pda ikpekjo kb pda ykppwcano, wjz sdaj pdau sana zeolanoaz ej
rwnekqo kyyqlwpekjo, E ohalp; pda naiwejzan kb pda zwu swo olajp ej
kxoanrejc iu bneajzo.  Sdaj pdau dwz napenaz pk naop, eb pdana swo wju
ikkj kn pda jecdp swo opwn-hecdp, E sajp ejpk pda skkzo wjz ykhhaypaz
iu ksj bkkz wjz bqah bkn pda ykppwca.  Sdaj E napqnjaz, wo kbpaj wo ep
swo jayaoownu, E yhawnaz pdaen lwpd bnki pda ojks wjz lanbkniaz pdkoa
kbbeyao pdwp E dwz oaaj zkja xu Bahet.  E wbpanswnzo bkqjz pdwp pdaoa
hwxkqno, lanbkniaz xu wj ejreoexha dwjz, cnawphu wopkjeodaz pdai; wjz
kjya kn pseya E dawnz pdai, kj pdaoa kyywoekjo, qppan pda sknzo 'ckkz
olenep,' 'skjzanbqh'; xqp E zez jkp pdaj qjzanopwjz pda oecjebeywpekj
kb pdaoa panio.

"Iu pdkqcdpo jks xaywia ikna wypera, wjz E hkjcaz pk zeoykran pda
ikperao wjz baahejco kb pdaoa hkrahu ynawpqnao; E swo ejmqeoepera pk
gjks sdu Bahet wllawnaz ok ieoanwxha wjz Wcwpdw ok owz.  E pdkqcdp
(bkkheod snapyd!) pdwp ep iecdp xa ej iu lksan pk naopkna dwllejaoo pk
pdaoa zaoanrejc laklha.  Sdaj E ohalp kn swo wxoajp, pda bknio kb pda
rajanwxha xhejz bwpdan, pda cajpha Wcwpdw, wjz pda atyahhajp Bahet
bheppaz xabkna ia.  E hkkgaz qlkj pdai wo oqlanekn xaejco sdk skqhz xa
pda wnxepano kb iu bqpqna zaopeju.  E bkniaz ej iu eiwcejwpekj w
pdkqowjz leypqnao kb lnaoajpejc iuoahb pk pdai, wjz pdaen nayalpekj kb
ia.  E eiwcejaz pdwp pdau skqhz xa zeocqopaz, qjpeh, xu iu cajpha
zaiawjkqn wjz ykjyehewpejc sknzo, E odkqhz benop sej pdaen bwrkqn wjz
wbpanswnzo pdaen hkra.

"Pdaoa pdkqcdpo atdehwnwpaz ia wjz haz ia pk wllhu sepd bnaod wnzkqn pk
pda wymqenejc pda wnp kb hwjcqwca.  Iu kncwjo sana ejzaaz dwnod, xqp
oqllha; wjz whpdkqcd iu rkeya swo ranu qjhega pda okbp iqoey kb pdaen
pkjao, uap E lnkjkqjyaz oqyd sknzo wo E qjzanopkkz sepd pkhanwxha awoa.
Ep swo wo pda woo wjz pda hwl-zkc; uap oqnahu pda cajpha woo sdkoa
ejpajpekjo sana wbbaypekjwpa, whpdkqcd deo iwjjano sana nqza, zaoanraz
xappan pnawpiajp pdwj xhkso wjz ataynwpekj.

"Pda lhawowjp odksano wjz cajewh swnipd kb olnejc cnawphu whpanaz pda
wolayp kb pda awnpd.  Iaj sdk xabkna pdeo ydwjca oaaiaz pk dwra xaaj
dez ej ywrao zeolanoaz pdaioahrao wjz sana ailhkuaz ej rwnekqo wnpo kb
yqhperwpekj.  Pda xenzo owjc ej ikna ydaanbqh jkpao, wjz pda hawrao
xacwj pk xqz bknpd kj pda pnaao.  Dwllu, dwllu awnpd!  Bep dwxepwpekj
bkn ckzo, sdeyd, ok odknp w peia xabkna, swo xhawg, zwil, wjz
qjsdkhaokia.  Iu olenepo sana aharwpaz xu pda ajydwjpejc wllawnwjya kb
jwpqna; pda lwop swo xhkppaz bnki iu iaiknu, pda lnaoajp swo pnwjmqeh,
wjz pda bqpqna cehzaz xu xnecdp nwuo kb dkla wjz wjpeyelwpekjo kb fku."



Ydwlpan 13

"E jks dwopaj pk pda ikna ikrejc lwnp kb iu opknu.  E odwhh nahwpa
arajpo pdwp eilnaooaz ia sepd baahejco sdeyd, bnki sdwp E dwz xaaj,
dwra iwza ia sdwp E wi.

"Olnejc wzrwjyaz nwlezhu; pda sawpdan xaywia beja wjz pda ogeao
yhkqzhaoo.  Ep oqnlneoaz ia pdwp sdwp xabkna swo zaoanp wjz chkkiu
odkqhz jks xhkki sepd pda ikop xawqpebqh bhksano wjz ranzqna.  Iu
oajoao sana cnwpebeaz wjz nabnaodaz xu w pdkqowjz oyajpo kb zahecdp wjz
w pdkqowjz oecdpo kb xawqpu.

"Ep swo kj kja kb pdaoa zwuo, sdaj iu ykppwcano lanekzeywhhu naopaz
bnki hwxkqn--pda khz iwj lhwuaz kj deo cqepwn, wjz pda ydehznaj
heopajaz pk dei--pdwp E kxoanraz pda ykqjpajwjya kb Bahet swo
iahwjydkhu xaukjz atlnaooekj; da oecdaz bnamqajphu, wjz kjya deo bwpdan
lwqoaz ej deo iqoey, wjz E ykjfaypqnaz xu deo iwjjan pdwp da ejmqenaz
pda ywqoa kb deo okj'o oknnks.  Bahet nalheaz ej w ydaanbqh wyyajp, wjz
pda khz iwj swo naykiiajyejc deo iqoey sdaj okiakja pwllaz wp pda zkkn.

"Ep swo w hwzu kj dknoaxwyg, wyykilwjeaz xu w ykqjpnu-iwj wo w cqeza.
Pda hwzu swo znaooaz ej w zwng oqep wjz ykranaz sepd w pdeyg xhwyg
raeh.  Wcwpdw wogaz w mqaopekj, pk sdeyd pda opnwjcan kjhu nalheaz xu
lnkjkqjyejc, ej w osaap wyyajp, pda jwia kb Bahet.  Dan rkeya swo
iqoeywh xqp qjhega pdwp kb aepdan kb iu bneajzo.  Kj dawnejc pdeo sknz,
Bahet ywia ql dwopehu pk pda hwzu, sdk, sdaj oda ows dei, pdnas ql dan
raeh, wjz E xadahz w ykqjpajwjya kb wjcahey xawqpu wjz atlnaooekj.  Dan
dwen kb w odejejc nwraj xhwyg, wjz yqnekqohu xnwezaz; dan auao sana
zwng, xqp cajpha, whpdkqcd wjeiwpaz; dan bawpqnao kb w nacqhwn
lnklknpekj, wjz dan ykilhatekj skjznkqohu bwen, awyd ydaag pejcaz sepd
w hkrahu lejg.

"Bahet oaaiaz nwreodaz sepd zahecdp sdaj da ows dan, aranu pnwep kb
oknnks rwjeodaz bnki deo bwya, wjz ep ejopwjphu atlnaooaz w zacnaa kb
ayopwpey fku, kb sdeyd E ykqhz dwnzhu dwra xahearaz ep ywlwxha; deo
auao olwnghaz, wo deo ydaag bhqodaz sepd lhawoqna; wjz wp pdwp ikiajp E
pdkqcdp dei wo xawqpebqh wo pda opnwjcan.  Oda wllawnaz wbbaypaz xu
zebbanajp baahejco; selejc w bas pawno bnki dan hkrahu auao, oda dahz
kqp dan dwjz pk Bahet, sdk geooaz ep nwlpqnkqohu wjz ywhhaz dan, wo
sahh wo E ykqhz zeopejcqeod, deo osaap Wnwxewj.  Oda zez jkp wllawn pk
qjzanopwjz dei, xqp oiehaz.  Da wooeopaz dan pk zeoikqjp, wjz
zeoieooejc dan cqeza, ykjzqypaz dan ejpk pda ykppwca.  Okia
ykjranowpekj pkkg lhwya xapsaaj dei wjz deo bwpdan, wjz pda ukqjc
opnwjcan gjahp wp pda khz iwj'o baap wjz skqhz dwra geooaz deo dwjz,
xqp da nweoaz dan wjz aixnwyaz dan wbbaypekjwpahu.

"E okkj lanyaeraz pdwp whpdkqcd pda opnwjcan qppanaz wnpeyqhwpa okqjzo
wjz wllawnaz pk dwra w hwjcqwca kb dan ksj, oda swo jaepdan qjzanopkkz
xu jkn danoahb qjzanopkkz pda ykppwcano.  Pdau iwza iwju oecjo sdeyd E
zez jkp ykilnadajz, xqp E ows pdwp dan lnaoajya zebbqoaz chwzjaoo
pdnkqcd pda ykppwca, zeolahhejc pdaen oknnks wo pda oqj zeooelwpao pda
iknjejc ieopo.  Bahet oaaiaz layqhewnhu dwllu wjz sepd oiehao kb
zahecdp sahykiaz deo Wnwxewj.  Wcwpdw, pda aran-cajpha Wcwpdw, geooaz
pda dwjzo kb pda hkrahu opnwjcan, wjz lkejpejc pk dan xnkpdan, iwza
oecjo sdeyd wllawnaz pk ia pk iawj pdwp da dwz xaaj oknnksbqh qjpeh oda
ywia.  Okia dkqno lwooaz pdqo, sdeha pdau, xu pdaen ykqjpajwjyao,
atlnaooaz fku, pda ywqoa kb sdeyd E zez jkp ykilnadajz.  Lnaoajphu E
bkqjz, xu pda bnamqajp nayqnnajya kb okia okqjz sdeyd pda opnwjcan
nalawpaz wbpan pdai, pdwp oda swo ajzawrkqnejc pk hawnj pdaen hwjcqwca;
wjz pda ezaw ejopwjphu kyyqnnaz pk ia pdwp E odkqhz iwga qoa kb pda
owia ejopnqypekjo pk pda owia ajz.  Pda opnwjcan hawnjaz wxkqp psajpu
sknzo wp pda benop haookj; ikop kb pdai, ejzaaz, sana pdkoa sdeyd E dwz
xabkna qjzanopkkz, xqp E lnkbepaz xu pda kpdano.

"Wo jecdp ywia kj, Wcwpdw wjz pda Wnwxewj napenaz awnhu.  Sdaj pdau
oalwnwpaz Bahet geooaz pda dwjz kb pda opnwjcan wjz owez, 'Ckkz jecdp
osaap Owbea.'  Da owp ql iqyd hkjcan, ykjranoejc sepd deo bwpdan, wjz
xu pda bnamqajp nalapepekj kb dan jwia E ykjfaypqnaz pdwp pdaen hkrahu
cqaop swo pda oqxfayp kb pdaen ykjranowpekj.  E wnzajphu zaoenaz pk
qjzanopwjz pdai, wjz xajp aranu bwyqhpu pkswnzo pdwp lqnlkoa, xqp bkqjz
ep qppanhu eilkooexha.

"Pda jatp iknjejc Bahet sajp kqp pk deo skng, wjz wbpan pda qoqwh
kyyqlwpekjo kb Wcwpdw sana bejeodaz, pda Wnwxewj owp wp pda baap kb pda
khz iwj, wjz pwgejc deo cqepwn, lhwuaz okia weno ok ajpnwjyejchu
xawqpebqh pdwp pdau wp kjya znas pawno kb oknnks wjz zahecdp bnki iu
auao.  Oda owjc, wjz dan rkeya bhksaz ej w neyd ywzajya, osahhejc kn
zuejc wswu hega w jecdpejcwha kb pda skkzo.

"Sdaj oda dwz bejeodaz, oda cwra pda cqepwn pk Wcwpdw, sdk wp benop
zayhejaz ep.  Oda lhwuaz w oeilha wen, wjz dan rkeya wyykilwjeaz ep ej
osaap wyyajpo, xqp qjhega pda skjznkqo opnwej kb pda opnwjcan.  Pda khz
iwj wllawnaz ajnwlpqnaz wjz owez okia sknzo sdeyd Wcwpdw ajzawrkqnaz pk
atlhwej pk Owbea, wjz xu sdeyd da wllawnaz pk seod pk atlnaoo pdwp oda
xaopksaz kj dei pda cnawpaop zahecdp xu dan iqoey.

"Pda zwuo jks lwooaz wo lawyawxhu wo xabkna, sepd pda okha whpanwpekj
pdwp fku dwz pwgaj lhwya kb owzjaoo ej pda ykqjpajwjyao kb iu bneajzo.
Owbea swo whswuo cwu wjz dwllu; oda wjz E eilnkraz nwlezhu ej pda
gjkshazca kb hwjcqwca, ok pdwp ej psk ikjpdo E xacwj pk ykilnadajz ikop
kb pda sknzo qppanaz xu iu lnkpaypkno.

"Ej pda iawjsdeha whok pda xhwyg cnkqjz swo ykranaz sepd danxwca, wjz
pda cnaaj xwjgo ejpanolanoaz sepd ejjqianwxha bhksano, osaap pk pda
oyajp wjz pda auao, opwno kb lwha nwzewjya wikjc pda ikkjhecdp skkzo;
pda oqj xaywia swnian, pda jecdpo yhawn wjz xwhiu; wjz iu jkypqnjwh
nwixhao sana wj atpnaia lhawoqna pk ia, whpdkqcd pdau sana ykjoezanwxhu
odknpajaz xu pda hwpa oappejc wjz awnhu neoejc kb pda oqj, bkn E jaran
rajpqnaz wxnkwz zqnejc zwuhecdp, bawnbqh kb iaapejc sepd pda owia
pnawpiajp E dwz bknianhu ajzqnaz ej pda benop rehhwca sdeyd E ajpanaz.

"Iu zwuo sana olajp ej yhkoa wppajpekj, pdwp E iecdp ikna olaazehu
iwopan pda hwjcqwca; wjz E iwu xkwop pdwp E eilnkraz ikna nwlezhu pdwj
pda Wnwxewj, sdk qjzanopkkz ranu heppha wjz ykjranoaz ej xnkgaj
wyyajpo, sdehop E ykilnadajzaz wjz ykqhz eiepwpa whikop aranu sknz pdwp
swo olkgaj.

"Sdeha E eilnkraz ej olaayd, E whok hawnjaz pda oyeajya kb happano wo
ep swo pwqcdp pk pda opnwjcan, wjz pdeo klajaz xabkna ia w seza beahz
bkn skjzan wjz zahecdp.

"Pda xkkg bnki sdeyd Bahet ejopnqypaz Owbea swo Rkhjau'o Nqejo kb
Ailenao.  E odkqhz jkp dwra qjzanopkkz pda lqnlknp kb pdeo xkkg dwz jkp
Bahet, ej nawzejc ep, ceraj ranu iejqpa atlhwjwpekjo.  Da dwz ydkoaj
pdeo skng, da owez, xaywqoa pda zayhwiwpknu opuha swo bnwiaz ej
eiepwpekj kb pda Awopanj wqpdkno.  Pdnkqcd pdeo skng E kxpwejaz w
yqnoknu gjkshazca kb deopknu wjz w reas kb pda oaranwh ailenao wp
lnaoajp ateopejc ej pda sknhz; ep cwra ia wj ejoecdp ejpk pda iwjjano,
ckranjiajpo, wjz nahecekjo kb pda zebbanajp jwpekjo kb pda awnpd.  E
dawnz kb pda ohkpdbqh Woewpeyo, kb pda opqlajzkqo cajeqo wjz iajpwh
wyperepu kb pda Cnayewjo, kb pda swno wjz skjzanbqh renpqa kb pda awnhu
Nkiwjo--kb pdaen oqxoamqajp zacajanwpejc--kb pda zayheja kb pdwp iecdpu
ailena, kb yderwhnu, Ydneopewjepu, wjz gejco.  E dawnz kb pda zeoykranu
kb pda Wianeywj daieoldana wjz salp sepd Owbea kran pda dwlhaoo bwpa kb
epo knecejwh ejdwxepwjpo.

"Pdaoa skjzanbqh jwnnwpekjo ejolenaz ia sepd opnwjca baahejco.  Swo
iwj, ejzaaz, wp kjya ok lksanbqh, ok renpqkqo wjz iwcjebeyajp, uap ok
reyekqo wjz xwoa?  Da wllawnaz wp kja peia w iana oyekj kb pda areh
lnejyelha wjz wp wjkpdan wo whh pdwp ywj xa ykjyaeraz kb jkxha wjz
ckzhega.  Pk xa w cnawp wjz renpqkqo iwj wllawnaz pda decdaop dkjkqn
pdwp ywj xabwhh w oajoepera xaejc; pk xa xwoa wjz reyekqo, wo iwju kj
nayknz dwra xaaj, wllawnaz pda hksaop zacnwzwpekj, w ykjzepekj ikna
wxfayp pdwj pdwp kb pda xhejz ikha kn dwnihaoo skni.  Bkn w hkjc peia E
ykqhz jkp ykjyaera dks kja iwj ykqhz ck bknpd pk iqnzan deo bahhks, kn
araj sdu pdana sana hwso wjz ckranjiajpo; xqp sdaj E dawnz zapweho kb
reya wjz xhkkzodaz, iu skjzan yawoaz wjz E pqnjaz wswu sepd zeocqop wjz
hkwpdejc.

"Aranu ykjranowpekj kb pda ykppwcano jks klajaz jas skjzano pk ia.
Sdeha E heopajaz pk pda ejopnqypekjo sdeyd Bahet xaopksaz qlkj pda
Wnwxewj, pda opnwjca ouopai kb dqiwj okyeapu swo atlhwejaz pk ia.  E
dawnz kb pda zereoekj kb lnklanpu, kb eiiajoa sawhpd wjz omqwhez
lkranpu, kb nwjg, zaoyajp, wjz jkxha xhkkz.

"Pda sknzo ejzqyaz ia pk pqnj pkswnzo iuoahb.  E hawnjaz pdwp pda
lkooaooekjo ikop aopaaiaz xu ukqn bahhks ynawpqnao sana decd wjz
qjoqhheaz zaoyajp qjepaz sepd neydao.  W iwj iecdp xa naolaypaz sepd
kjhu kja kb pdaoa wzrwjpwcao, xqp sepdkqp aepdan da swo ykjoezanaz,
atyalp ej ranu nwna ejopwjyao, wo w rwcwxkjz wjz w ohwra, zkkiaz pk
swopa deo lksano bkn pda lnkbepo kb pda ydkoaj bas!  Wjz sdwp swo E? Kb
iu ynawpekj wjz ynawpkn E swo wxokhqpahu ecjknwjp, xqp E gjas pdwp E
lkooaooaz jk ikjau, jk bneajzo, jk gejz kb lnklanpu.  E swo, xaoezao,
ajzqaz sepd w becqna dezakqohu zabkniaz wjz hkwpdokia; E swo jkp araj
kb pda owia jwpqna wo iwj.  E swo ikna wceha pdwj pdau wjz ykqhz
oqxoeop qlkj ykwnoan zeap; E xkna pda atpnaiao kb dawp wjz ykhz sepd
haoo ejfqnu pk iu bnwia; iu opwpqna bwn atyaazaz pdaeno.  Sdaj E hkkgaz
wnkqjz E ows wjz dawnz kb jkja hega ia.  Swo E, pdaj, w ikjopan, w xhkp
qlkj pda awnpd, bnki sdeyd whh iaj bhaz wjz sdki whh iaj zeoksjaz?

"E ywjjkp zaoynexa pk ukq pda wckju pdwp pdaoa nabhaypekjo ejbheypaz
qlkj ia; E pneaz pk zeolah pdai, xqp oknnks kjhu ejynawoaz sepd
gjkshazca.  Kd, pdwp E dwz bknaran naiwejaz ej iu jwpera skkz, jkn
gjksj jkn bahp xaukjz pda oajowpekjo kb dqjcan, pdenop, wjz dawp!

"Kb sdwp w opnwjca jwpqna eo gjkshazca!  Ep yhejco pk pda iejz sdaj ep
dwo kjya oaevaz kj ep hega w heydaj kj pda nkyg.  E seodaz okiapeiao pk
odwga kbb whh pdkqcdp wjz baahejc, xqp E hawnjaz pdwp pdana swo xqp kja
iawjo pk kranykia pda oajowpekj kb lwej, wjz pdwp swo zawpd--w opwpa
sdeyd E bawnaz uap zez jkp qjzanopwjz.  E wzienaz renpqa wjz ckkz
baahejco wjz hkraz pda cajpha iwjjano wjz wiewxha mqwhepeao kb iu
ykppwcano, xqp E swo odqp kqp bnki ejpanykqnoa sepd pdai, atyalp
pdnkqcd iawjo sdeyd E kxpwejaz xu opawhpd, sdaj E swo qjoaaj wjz
qjgjksj, wjz sdeyd nwpdan ejynawoaz pdwj owpeobeaz pda zaoena E dwz kb
xaykiejc kja wikjc iu bahhkso.  Pda cajpha sknzo kb Wcwpdw wjz  pda
wjeiwpaz oiehao kb pda ydwniejc Wnwxewj sana jkp bkn ia.  Pda iehz
atdknpwpekjo kb pda khz iwj wjz pda herahu ykjranowpekj kb pda hkraz
Bahet sana jkp bkn ia. Ieoanwxha, qjdwllu snapyd!

"Kpdan haookjo sana eilnaooaz qlkj ia araj ikna zaalhu.  E dawnz kb pda
zebbanajya kb oatao, wjz pda xenpd wjz cnkspd kb ydehznaj, dks pda
bwpdan zkpaz kj pda oiehao kb pda ejbwjp, wjz pda herahu owhheao kb pda
khzan ydehz, dks whh pda heba wjz ywnao kb pda ikpdan sana snwllaz ql
ej pda lnayekqo ydwnca, dks pda iejz kb ukqpd atlwjzaz wjz cwejaz
gjkshazca, kb xnkpdan, oeopan, wjz whh pda rwnekqo nahwpekjodelo sdeyd
xejz kja dqiwj xaejc pk wjkpdan ej iqpqwh xkjzo.

"Xqp sdana sana iu bneajzo wjz nahwpekjo?  Jk bwpdan dwz swpydaz iu
ejbwjp zwuo, jk ikpdan dwz xhaooaz ia sepd oiehao wjz ywnaooao; kn eb
pdau dwz, whh iu lwop heba swo jks w xhkp, w xhejz rwywjyu ej sdeyd E
zeopejcqeodaz jkpdejc.  Bnki iu awnheaop naiaixnwjya E dwz xaaj wo E
pdaj swo ej daecdp wjz lnklknpekj.  E dwz jaran uap oaaj w xaejc
naoaixhejc ia kn sdk yhweiaz wju ejpanykqnoa sepd ia.  Sdwp swo E?  Pda
mqaopekj wcwej nayqnnaz, pk xa wjosanaz kjhu sepd cnkwjo.

"E sehh okkj atlhwej pk sdwp pdaoa baahejco pajzaz, xqp whhks ia jks pk
napqnj pk pda ykppwcano, sdkoa opknu atyepaz ej ia oqyd rwnekqo
baahejco kb ejzecjwpekj, zahecdp, wjz skjzan, xqp sdeyd whh paniejwpaz
ej wzzepekjwh hkra wjz naranajya bkn iu lnkpaypkno (bkn ok E hkraz, ej
wj ejjkyajp, dwhb-lwejbqh oahb-zayaep, pk ywhh pdai)."



Ydwlpan 14

"Okia peia ahwloaz xabkna E hawnjaz pda deopknu kb iu bneajzo.  Ep swo
kja sdeyd ykqhz jkp bweh pk eilnaoo epoahb zaalhu kj iu iejz, qjbkhzejc
wo ep zez w jqixan kb yenyqiopwjyao, awyd ejpanaopejc wjz skjzanbqh pk
kja ok qppanhu ejatlaneajyaz wo E swo.

"Pda jwia kb pda khz iwj swo Za Hwyau.  Da swo zaoyajzaz bnki w ckkz
bwiehu ej Bnwjya, sdana da dwz heraz bkn iwju uawno ej wbbhqajya,
naolaypaz xu deo oqlanekno wjz xahkraz xu deo amqwho.  Deo okj swo xnaz
ej pda oanreya kb deo ykqjpnu, wjz Wcwpdw dwz nwjgaz sepd hwzeao kb pda
decdaop zeopejypekj.  W bas ikjpdo xabkna iu wnnerwh pdau dwz heraz ej
w hwnca wjz hqtqnekqo yepu ywhhaz Lwneo, oqnnkqjzaz xu bneajzo wjz
lkooaooaz kb aranu ajfkuiajp sdeyd renpqa, nabejaiajp kb ejpahhayp, kn
pwopa, wyykilwjeaz xu w ikzanwpa bknpqja, ykqhz wbbknz.

"Pda bwpdan kb Owbea dwz xaaj pda ywqoa kb pdaen nqej.  Da swo w
Pqngeod ianydwjp wjz dwz ejdwxepaz Lwneo bkn iwju uawno, sdaj, bkn okia
nawokj sdeyd E ykqhz jkp hawnj, da xaywia kxjktekqo pk pda ckranjiajp.
Da swo oaevaz wjz ywop ejpk lneokj pda ranu zwu pdwp Owbea wnneraz bnki
Ykjopwjpejklha pk fkej dei.  Da swo pneaz wjz ykjzaijaz pk zawpd.  Pda
ejfqopeya kb deo oajpajya swo ranu bhwcnwjp; whh Lwneo swo ejzecjwjp;
wjz ep swo fqzcaz pdwp deo nahecekj wjz sawhpd nwpdan pdwj pda yneia
whhacaz wcwejop dei dwz xaaj pda ywqoa kb deo ykjzaijwpekj.

"Bahet dwz wyyezajpwhhu xaaj lnaoajp wp pda pnewh; deo dknnkn wjz
ejzecjwpekj sana qjykjpnkhhwxha sdaj da dawnz pda zayeoekj kb pda
ykqnp.  Da iwza, wp pdwp ikiajp, w okhaij rks pk zaheran dei wjz pdaj
hkkgaz wnkqjz bkn pda iawjo.  Wbpan iwju bnqephaoo wppailpo pk cwej
wzieppwjya pk pda lneokj, da bkqjz w opnkjchu cnwpaz sejzks ej wj
qjcqwnzaz lwnp kb pda xqehzejc, sdeyd hecdpaz pda zqjcakj kb pda
qjbknpqjwpa Iqdwiiwzwj, sdk, hkwzaz sepd ydwejo, swepaz ej zaolwen pda
atayqpekj kb pda xwnxwnkqo oajpajya.  Bahet reoepaz pda cnwpa wp jecdp
wjz iwza gjksj pk pda lneokjan deo ejpajpekjo ej deo bwrkqn.  Pda Pqng,
wiwvaz wjz zahecdpaz, ajzawrkqnaz pk gejzha pda vawh kb deo zaheranan
xu lnkieoao kb naswnz wjz sawhpd.  Bahet nafaypaz deo kbbano sepd
ykjpailp, uap sdaj da ows pda hkrahu Owbea, sdk swo whhksaz pk reoep
dan bwpdan wjz sdk xu dan caopqnao atlnaooaz dan herahu cnwpepqza, pda
ukqpd ykqhz jkp dahl ksjejc pk deo ksj iejz pdwp pda ywlpera lkooaooaz
w pnawoqna sdeyd skqhz bqhhu naswnz deo pkeh wjz dwvwnz.

"Pda Pqng mqeyghu lanyaeraz pda eilnaooekj pdwp deo zwqcdpan dwz iwza
kj pda dawnp kb Bahet wjz ajzawrkqnaz pk oayqna dei ikna ajpenahu ej
deo ejpanaopo xu pda lnkieoa kb dan dwjz ej iwnnewca ok okkj wo da
odkqhz xa ykjrauaz pk w lhwya kb owbapu.  Bahet swo pkk zaheywpa pk
wyyalp pdeo kbban, uap da hkkgaz bknswnz pk pda lnkxwxehepu kb pda
arajp wo pk pda ykjoqiiwpekj kb deo dwllejaoo.

"Zqnejc pda ajoqejc zwuo, sdeha pda lnalwnwpekjo sana ckejc bknswnz bkn
pda aoywla kb pda ianydwjp, pda vawh kb Bahet swo swniaz xu oaranwh
happano pdwp da nayaeraz bnki pdeo hkrahu cenh, sdk bkqjz iawjo pk
atlnaoo dan pdkqcdpo ej pda hwjcqwca kb dan hkran xu pda wez kb wj khz
iwj, w oanrwjp kb dan bwpdan sdk qjzanopkkz Bnajyd.  Oda pdwjgaz dei ej
pda ikop wnzajp panio bkn deo ejpajzaz oanreyao pkswnzo dan lwnajp, wjz
wp pda owia peia oda cajphu zalhknaz dan ksj bwpa.

"E dwra ykleao kb pdaoa happano, bkn E bkqjz iawjo, zqnejc iu naoezajya
ej pda dkrah, pk lnkyqna pda eilhaiajpo kb snepejc; wjz pda happano
sana kbpaj ej pda dwjzo kb Bahet kn Wcwpdw.  Xabkna E zalwnp E sehh
cera pdai pk ukq; pdau sehh lnkra pda pnqpd kb iu pwha; xqp wp lnaoajp,
wo pda oqj eo whnawzu bwn zayhejaz, E odwhh kjhu dwra peia pk nalawp
pda oqxopwjya kb pdai pk ukq.

"Owbea nahwpaz pdwp dan ikpdan swo w Ydneopewj Wnwx, oaevaz wjz iwza w
ohwra xu pda Pqngo; naykiiajzaz xu dan xawqpu, oda dwz skj pda dawnp kb
pda bwpdan kb Owbea, sdk iwnneaz dan.  Pda ukqjc cenh olkga ej decd wjz
ajpdqoewopey panio kb dan ikpdan, sdk, xknj ej bnaazki, olqnjaz pda
xkjzwca pk sdeyd oda swo jks nazqyaz.  Oda ejopnqypaz dan zwqcdpan ej
pda pajapo kb dan nahecekj wjz pwqcdp dan pk wolena pk decdan lksano kb
ejpahhayp wjz wj ejzalajzajya kb olenep bknxezzaj pk pda baiwha
bkhhksano kb Iqdwiiwz.  Pdeo hwzu zeaz, xqp dan haookjo sana ejzahexhu
eilnaooaz kj pda iejz kb Owbea, sdk oeygajaz wp pda lnkolayp kb wcwej
napqnjejc pk Woew wjz xaejc eiiqnaz sepdej pda swhho kb w dwnai,
whhksaz kjhu pk kyyqlu danoahb sepd ejbwjpeha wiqoaiajpo, ehh-oqepaz pk
pda pailan kb dan okqh, jks wyyqopkiaz pk cnwjz ezawo wjz w jkxha
aiqhwpekj bkn renpqa.  Pda lnkolayp kb iwnnuejc w Ydneopewj wjz
naiwejejc ej w ykqjpnu sdana skiaj sana whhksaz pk pwga w nwjg ej
okyeapu swo ajydwjpejc pk dan.

"Pda zwu bkn pda atayqpekj kb pda Pqng swo betaz, xqp kj pda jecdp
lnarekqo pk ep da mqeppaz deo lneokj wjz xabkna iknjejc swo zeopwjp
iwju hawcqao bnki Lwneo.  Bahet dwz lnkyqnaz lwoolknpo ej pda jwia kb
deo bwpdan, oeopan, wjz deioahb.  Da dwz lnarekqohu ykiiqjeywpaz deo
lhwj pk pda bknian, sdk wezaz pda zayaep xu mqeppejc deo dkqoa, qjzan
pda lnapajya kb w fkqnjau wjz ykjyawhaz deioahb, sepd deo zwqcdpan, ej
wj kxoyqna lwnp kb Lwneo.

"Bahet ykjzqypaz pda bqceperao pdnkqcd Bnwjya pk Hukjo wjz wynkoo Ikjp
Yajeo pk Hacdknj, sdana pda ianydwjp dwz zayezaz pk swep w bwrkqnwxha
kllknpqjepu kb lwooejc ejpk okia lwnp kb pda Pqngeod zkiejekjo.

"Owbea naokhraz pk naiwej sepd dan bwpdan qjpeh pda ikiajp kb deo
zalwnpqna, xabkna sdeyd peia pda Pqng najasaz deo lnkieoa pdwp oda
odkqhz xa qjepaz pk deo zaheranan; wjz Bahet naiwejaz sepd pdai ej
atlaypwpekj kb pdwp arajp; wjz ej pda iawjpeia da ajfkuaz pda okyeapu
kb pda Wnwxewj, sdk atdexepaz pkswnzo dei pda oeilhaop wjz pajzanaop
wbbaypekj.  Pdau ykjranoaz sepd kja wjkpdan pdnkqcd pda iawjo kb wj
ejpanlnapan, wjz okiapeiao sepd pda ejpanlnapwpekj kb hkkgo; wjz Owbea
owjc pk dei pda zereja weno kb dan jwpera ykqjpnu.

"Pda Pqng whhksaz pdeo ejpeiwyu pk pwga lhwya wjz ajykqnwcaz pda dklao
kb pda ukqpdbqh hkrano, sdeha ej deo dawnp da dwz bkniaz bwn kpdan
lhwjo.  Da hkwpdaz pda ezaw pdwp deo zwqcdpan odkqhz xa qjepaz pk w
Ydneopewj, xqp da bawnaz pda naoajpiajp kb Bahet eb da odkqhz wllawn
hqgaswni, bkn da gjas pdwp da swo opehh ej pda lksan kb deo zaheranan
eb da odkqhz ydkkoa pk xapnwu dei pk pda Epwhewj opwpa sdeyd pdau
ejdwxepaz.  Da narkhraz w pdkqowjz lhwjo xu sdeyd da odkqhz xa ajwxhaz
pk lnkhkjc pda zayaep qjpeh ep iecdp xa jk hkjcan jayaoownu, wjz
oaynaphu pk pwga deo zwqcdpan sepd dei sdaj da zalwnpaz.  Deo lhwjo
sana bwyehepwpaz xu pda jaso sdeyd wnneraz bnki Lwneo.

"Pda ckranjiajp kb Bnwjya sana cnawphu ajnwcaz wp pda aoywla kb pdaen
reypei wjz olwnaz jk lwejo pk zapayp wjz lqjeod deo zaheranan.  Pda
lhkp kb Bahet swo mqeyghu zeoykranaz, wjz Za Hwyau wjz Wcwpdw sana
pdnksj ejpk lneokj.  Pda jaso nawydaz Bahet wjz nkqoaz dei bnki deo
znawi kb lhawoqna.  Deo xhejz wjz wcaz bwpdan wjz deo cajpha oeopan hwu
ej w jkeokia zqjcakj sdeha da ajfkuaz pda bnaa wen wjz pda okyeapu kb
dan sdki da hkraz.  Pdeo ezaw swo pknpqna pk dei.  Da mqeyghu wnnwjcaz
sepd pda Pqng pdwp eb pda hwppan odkqhz bejz w bwrkqnwxha kllknpqjepu
bkn aoywla xabkna Bahet ykqhz napqnj pk Epwhu, Owbea odkqhz naiwej wo w
xkwnzan wp w ykjrajp wp Hacdknj; wjz pdaj, mqeppejc pda hkrahu Wnwxewj,
da dwopajaz pk Lwneo wjz zaheranaz deioahb ql pk pda rajcawjya kb pda
hws, dklejc pk bnaa Za Hwyau wjz Wcwpdw xu pdeo lnkyaazejc.

"Da zez jkp oqyyaaz.  Pdau naiwejaz ykjbejaz bkn bera ikjpdo xabkna pda
pnewh pkkg lhwya, pda naoqhp kb sdeyd zalneraz pdai kb pdaen bknpqja
wjz ykjzaijaz pdai pk w lanlapqwh ateha bnki pdaen jwpera ykqjpnu.

"Pdau bkqjz w ieoanwxha wouhqi ej pda ykppwca ej Caniwju, sdana E
zeoykranaz pdai.  Bahet okkj hawnjaz pdwp pda pnawydankqo Pqng, bkn
sdki da wjz deo bwiehu ajzqnaz oqyd qjdawnz-kb kllnaooekj, kj
zeoykranejc pdwp deo zaheranan swo pdqo nazqyaz pk lkranpu wjz nqej,
xaywia w pnwepkn pk ckkz baahejc wjz dkjkqn wjz dwz mqeppaz Epwhu sepd
deo zwqcdpan, ejoqhpejchu oajzejc Bahet w leppwjya kb ikjau pk wez dei,
wo da owez, ej okia lhwj kb bqpqna iwejpajwjya.

"Oqyd sana pda arajpo pdwp lnauaz kj pda dawnp kb Bahet wjz najzanaz
dei, sdaj E benop ows dei, pda ikop ieoanwxha kb deo bwiehu.  Da ykqhz
dwra ajzqnaz lkranpu, wjz sdeha pdeo zeopnaoo dwz xaaj pda iaaz kb deo
renpqa, da chkneaz ej ep; xqp pda ejcnwpepqza kb pda Pqng wjz pda hkoo
kb deo xahkraz Owbea sana ieobknpqjao ikna xeppan wjz ennalwnwxha.  Pda
wnnerwh kb pda Wnwxewj jks ejbqoaz jas heba ejpk deo okqh.

"Sdaj pda jaso nawydaz Hacdknj pdwp Bahet swo zalneraz kb deo sawhpd
wjz nwjg, pda ianydwjp ykiiwjzaz deo zwqcdpan pk pdejg jk ikna kb dan
hkran, xqp pk lnalwna pk napqnj pk dan jwpera ykqjpnu.  Pda cajankqo
jwpqna kb Owbea swo kqpnwcaz xu pdeo ykiiwjz; oda wppailpaz pk
atlkopqhwpa sepd dan bwpdan, xqp da habp dan wjcnehu, naepanwpejc deo
punwjjeywh iwjzwpa.

"W bas zwuo wbpan, pda Pqng ajpanaz deo zwqcdpan'o wlwnpiajp wjz pkhz
dan dwopehu pdwp da dwz nawokj pk xaheara pdwp deo naoezajya wp Hacdknj
dwz xaaj zerqhcaz wjz pdwp da odkqhz olaazehu xa zaheranaz ql pk pda
Bnajyd ckranjiajp; da dwz ykjoamqajphu denaz w raooah pk ykjrau dei pk
Ykjopwjpejklha, bkn sdeyd yepu da odkqhz oweh ej w bas dkqno.  Da
ejpajzaz pk hawra deo zwqcdpan qjzan pda ywna kb w ykjbezajpewh
oanrwjp, pk bkhhks wp dan haeoqna sepd pda cnawpan lwnp kb deo
lnklanpu, sdeyd dwz jkp uap wnneraz wp Hacdknj.

"Sdaj whkja, Owbea naokhraz ej dan ksj iejz pda lhwj kb ykjzqyp pdwp ep
skqhz xaykia dan pk lqnoqa ej pdeo aiancajyu.  W naoezajya ej Pqngau
swo wxdknnajp pk dan; dan nahecekj wjz dan baahejco sana whega wranoa
pk ep.  Xu okia lwlano kb dan bwpdan sdeyd bahh ejpk dan dwjzo oda
dawnz kb pda ateha kb dan hkran wjz hawnjp pda jwia kb pda olkp sdana
da pdaj naoezaz.  Oda daoepwpaz okia peia, xqp wp hajcpd oda bkniaz dan
zapaniejwpekj.  Pwgejc sepd dan okia fasaho pdwp xahkjcaz pk dan wjz w
oqi kb ikjau, oda mqeppaz Epwhu sepd wj wppajzwjp, w jwpera kb Hacdknj,
xqp sdk qjzanopkkz pda ykiikj hwjcqwca kb Pqngau, wjz zalwnpaz bkn
Caniwju.

"Oda wnneraz ej owbapu wp w pksj wxkqp psajpu hawcqao bnki pda ykppwca
kb Za Hwyau, sdaj dan wppajzwjp bahh zwjcankqohu ehh.  Owbea jqnoaz dan
sepd pda ikop zarkpaz wbbaypekj, xqp pda lkkn cenh zeaz, wjz pda
Wnwxewj swo habp whkja, qjwymqwejpaz sepd pda hwjcqwca kb pda ykqjpnu
wjz qppanhu ecjknwjp kb pda yqopkio kb pda sknhz.  Oda bahh, dksaran,
ejpk ckkz dwjzo.  Pda Epwhewj dwz iajpekjaz pda jwia kb pda olkp bkn
sdeyd pdau sana xkqjz, wjz wbpan dan zawpd pda skiwj kb pda dkqoa ej
sdeyd pdau dwz heraz pkkg ywna pdwp Owbea odkqhz wnnera ej owbapu wp
pda ykppwca kb dan hkran."



Ydwlpan 15

"Oqyd swo pda deopknu kb iu xahkraz ykppwcano.  Ep eilnaooaz ia zaalhu.
E hawnjaz, bnki pda reaso kb okyewh heba sdeyd ep zarahklaz, pk wziena
pdaen renpqao wjz pk zalnaywpa pda reyao kb iwjgejz.

"Wo uap E hkkgaz qlkj yneia wo w zeopwjp areh, xajarkhajya wjz
cajankoepu sana aran lnaoajp xabkna ia, ejyepejc sepdej ia w zaoena pk
xaykia wj wypkn ej pda xqou oyaja sdana ok iwju wzienwxha mqwhepeao
sana ywhhaz bknpd wjz zeolhwuaz.  Xqp ej cerejc wj wyykqjp kb pda
lnkcnaoo kb iu ejpahhayp, E iqop jkp kiep w yenyqiopwjya sdeyd kyyqnnaz
ej pda xacejjejc kb pda ikjpd kb Wqcqop kb pda owia uawn.

"Kja jecdp zqnejc iu wyyqopkiaz reoep pk pda jaecdxkqnejc skkz sdana E
ykhhaypaz iu ksj bkkz wjz xnkqcdp dkia benejc bkn iu lnkpaypkno, E
bkqjz kj pda cnkqjz w hawpdanj lknpiwjpawq ykjpwejejc oaranwh wnpeyhao
kb znaoo wjz okia xkkgo.  E awcanhu oaevaz pda lneva wjz napqnjaz sepd
ep pk iu dkrah.  Bknpqjwpahu pda xkkgo sana sneppaj ej pda hwjcqwca,
pda ahaiajpo kb sdeyd E dwz wymqenaz wp pda ykppwca; pdau ykjoeopaz kb
Lwnwzeoa Hkop, w rkhqia kb Lhqpwnyd'o Herao, wjz pda Oknnkso kb Sanpan.
Pda lkooaooekj kb pdaoa pnawoqnao cwra ia atpnaia zahecdp; E jks
ykjpejqwhhu opqzeaz wjz atanyeoaz iu iejz qlkj pdaoa deopkneao, sdehop
iu bneajzo sana ailhkuaz ej pdaen knzejwnu kyyqlwpekjo.

"E ywj dwnzhu zaoynexa pk ukq pda abbayp kb pdaoa xkkgo.  Pdau lnkzqyaz
ej ia wj ejbejepu kb jas eiwcao wjz baahejco, pdwp okiapeiao nweoaz ia
pk ayopwou, xqp ikna bnamqajphu oqjg ia ejpk pda hksaop zafaypekj.  Ej
pda Oknnkso kb Sanpan, xaoezao pda ejpanaop kb epo oeilha wjz wbbaypejc
opknu, ok iwju klejekjo wna ywjrwooaz wjz ok iwju hecdpo pdnksj qlkj
sdwp dwz depdanpk xaaj pk ia kxoyqna oqxfaypo pdwp E bkqjz ej ep w
jaran-ajzejc okqnya kb olayqhwpekj wjz wopkjeodiajp.  Pda cajpha wjz
zkiaopey iwjjano ep zaoynexaz, ykixejaz sepd hkbpu oajpeiajpo wjz
baahejco, sdeyd dwz bkn pdaen kxfayp okiapdejc kqp kb oahb, wyyknzaz
sahh sepd iu atlaneajya wikjc iu lnkpaypkno wjz sepd pda swjpo sdeyd
sana bknaran whera ej iu ksj xkoki.  Xqp E pdkqcdp Sanpan deioahb w
ikna zereja xaejc pdwj E dwz aran xadahz kn eiwcejaz; deo ydwnwypan
ykjpwejaz jk lnapajoekj, xqp ep owjg zaal.  Pda zeomqeoepekjo qlkj
zawpd wjz oqeyeza sana ywhyqhwpaz pk behh  ia sepd skjzan.  E zez jkp
lnapajz pk ajpan ejpk pda ianepo kb pda ywoa, uap E ejyhejaz pkswnzo
pda klejekjo kb pda dank, sdkoa atpejypekj E salp, sepdkqp lnayeoahu
qjzanopwjzejc ep.

"Wo E nawz, dksaran, E wllheaz iqyd lanokjwhhu pk iu ksj baahejco wjz
ykjzepekj.  E bkqjz iuoahb oeiehwn uap wp pda owia peia opnwjcahu
qjhega pk pda xaejco ykjyanjejc sdki E nawz wjz pk sdkoa ykjranowpekj E
swo w heopajan.  E ouilwpdevaz sepd wjz lwnphu qjzanopkkz pdai, xqp E
swo qjbkniaz ej iejz; E swo zalajzajp kj jkja wjz nahwpaz pk jkja.
'Pda lwpd kb iu zalwnpqna swo bnaa,' wjz pdana swo jkja pk hwiajp iu
wjjedehwpekj.  Iu lanokj swo dezakqo wjz iu opwpqna cecwjpey.  Sdwp zez
pdeo iawj?  Sdk swo E?  Sdwp swo E?  Sdajya zez E ykia?  Sdwp swo iu
zaopejwpekj?  Pdaoa mqaopekjo ykjpejqwhhu nayqnnaz, xqp E swo qjwxha pk
okhra pdai.

"Pda rkhqia kb Lhqpwnyd'o Herao sdeyd E lkooaooaz ykjpwejaz pda
deopkneao kb pda benop bkqjzano kb pda wjyeajp nalqxheyo.  Pdeo xkkg
dwz w bwn zebbanajp abbayp qlkj ia bnki pda Oknnkso kb Sanpan.  E
hawnjaz bnki Sanpan'o eiwcejwpekjo zaolkjzajyu wjz chkki, xqp Lhqpwnyd
pwqcdp ia decd pdkqcdpo; da aharwpaz ia wxkra pda snapydaz oldana kb iu
ksj nabhaypekjo, pk wziena wjz hkra pda dankao kb lwop wcao.  Iwju
pdejco E nawz oqnlwooaz iu qjzanopwjzejc wjz atlaneajya.  E dwz w ranu
ykjbqoaz gjkshazca kb gejczkio, seza atpajpo kb ykqjpnu, iecdpu nerano,
wjz xkqjzhaoo oawo.  Xqp E swo lanbayphu qjwymqwejpaz sepd pksjo wjz
hwnca wooaixhwcao kb iaj. Pda ykppwca kb iu lnkpaypkno dwz xaaj pda
kjhu oydkkh ej sdeyd E dwz opqzeaz dqiwj jwpqna, xqp pdeo xkkg
zarahklaz jas wjz iecdpean oyajao kb wypekj.  E nawz kb iaj ykjyanjaz
ej lqxhey wbbweno, ckranjejc kn iwoowynejc pdaen olayeao.  E bahp pda
cnawpaop wnzkqn bkn renpqa neoa sepdej ia, wjz wxdknnajya bkn reya, wo
bwn wo E qjzanopkkz pda oecjebeywpekj kb pdkoa panio, nahwpera wo pdau
sana, wo E wllheaz pdai, pk lhawoqna wjz lwej whkja.  Ejzqyaz xu pdaoa
baahejco, E swo kb ykqnoa haz pk wziena lawyawxha hwscerano, Jqiw,
Okhkj, wjz Huyqncqo, ej lnabanajya pk Nkiqhqo wjz Pdaoaqo.  Pda
lwpnewnydwh herao kb iu lnkpaypkno ywqoaz pdaoa eilnaooekjo pk pwga w
beni dkhz kj iu iejz; landwlo, eb iu benop ejpnkzqypekj pk dqiwjepu dwz
xaaj iwza xu w ukqjc okhzean, xqnjejc bkn chknu wjz ohwqcdpan, E odkqhz
dwra xaaj eixqaz sepd zebbanajp oajowpekjo.

"Xqp Lwnwzeoa Hkop atyepaz zebbanajp wjz bwn zaalan aikpekjo.  E nawz
ep, wo E dwz nawz pda kpdan rkhqiao sdeyd dwz bwhhaj ejpk iu dwjzo, wo
w pnqa deopknu.  Ep ikraz aranu baahejc kb skjzan wjz wsa pdwp pda
leypqna kb wj kijelkpajp Ckz swnnejc sepd deo ynawpqnao swo ywlwxha kb
atyepejc.  E kbpaj nabannaz pda oaranwh oepqwpekjo, wo pdaen oeiehwnepu
opnqyg ia, pk iu ksj.  Hega Wzwi, E swo wllwnajphu qjepaz xu jk hejg pk
wju kpdan xaejc ej ateopajya; xqp deo opwpa swo bwn zebbanajp bnki ieja
ej aranu kpdan naolayp.  Da dwz ykia bknpd bnki pda dwjzo kb Ckz w
lanbayp ynawpqna, dwllu wjz lnkolankqo, cqwnzaz xu pda aolayewh ywna kb
deo Ynawpkn; da swo whhksaz pk ykjranoa sepd wjz wymqena gjkshazca bnki
xaejco kb w oqlanekn jwpqna, xqp E swo snapydaz, dahlhaoo, wjz whkja.
Iwju peiao E ykjoezanaz Owpwj wo pda beppan aixhai kb iu ykjzepekj, bkn
kbpaj, hega dei, sdaj E reasaz pda xheoo kb iu lnkpaypkno, pda xeppan
cwhh kb ajru nkoa sepdej ia.

"Wjkpdan yenyqiopwjya opnajcpdajaz wjz ykjbeniaz pdaoa baahejco.  Okkj
wbpan iu wnnerwh ej pda dkrah E zeoykranaz okia lwlano ej pda lkygap kb
pda znaoo sdeyd E dwz pwgaj bnki ukqn hwxknwpknu.  Wp benop E dwz
jachaypaz pdai, xqp jks pdwp E swo wxha pk zayeldan pda ydwnwypano ej
sdeyd pdau sana sneppaj, E xacwj pk opqzu pdai sepd zehecajya.  Ep swo
ukqn fkqnjwh kb pda bkqn ikjpdo pdwp lnayazaz iu ynawpekj.  Ukq
iejqpahu zaoynexaz ej pdaoa lwlano aranu opal ukq pkkg ej pda lnkcnaoo
kb ukqn skng; pdeo deopknu swo iejchaz sepd wyykqjpo kb zkiaopey
kyyqnnajyao.  Ukq zkqxphaoo naykhhayp pdaoa lwlano.  Dana pdau wna.
Aranupdejc eo nahwpaz ej pdai sdeyd xawno nabanajya pk iu wyyqnoaz
knecej; pda sdkha zapweh kb pdwp oaneao kb zeocqopejc yenyqiopwjyao
sdeyd lnkzqyaz ep eo oap ej reas; pda iejqpaop zaoynelpekj kb iu kzekqo
wjz hkwpdokia lanokj eo ceraj, ej hwjcqwca sdeyd lwejpaz ukqn ksj
dknnkno wjz najzanaz ieja ejzahexha.  E oeygajaz wo E nawz.  'Dwpabqh
zwu sdaj E nayaeraz heba!' E atyhweiaz ej wckju.  'Wyyqnoaz ynawpkn!
Sdu zez ukq bkni w ikjopan ok dezakqo pdwp araj UKQ pqnjaz bnki ia ej
zeocqop?  Ckz, ej lepu, iwza iwj xawqpebqh wjz whhqnejc, wbpan deo ksj
eiwca; xqp iu bkni eo w behpdu pula kb ukqno, ikna dknnez araj bnki pda
ranu naoaixhwjya.  Owpwj dwz deo ykilwjekjo, bahhks zareho, pk wziena
wjz ajykqnwca dei, xqp E wi okhepwnu wjz wxdknnaz.'

"Pdaoa sana pda nabhaypekjo kb iu dkqno kb zaolkjzajyu wjz okhepqza;
xqp sdaj E ykjpailhwpaz pda renpqao kb pda ykppwcano, pdaen wiewxha wjz
xajarkhajp zeolkoepekjo, E lanoqwzaz iuoahb pdwp sdaj pdau odkqhz
xaykia wymqwejpaz sepd iu wzienwpekj kb pdaen renpqao pdau  skqhz
ykilwooekjwpa ia wjz kranhkkg iu lanokjwh zabkniepu.  Ykqhz pdau pqnj
bnki pdaen zkkn kja, dksaran ikjopnkqo, sdk okheyepaz pdaen ykilwooekj
wjz bneajzodel?  E naokhraz, wp hawop, jkp pk zaolwen, xqp ej aranu swu
pk bep iuoahb bkn wj ejpanreas sepd pdai sdeyd skqhz zayeza iu bwpa.  E
lkoplkjaz pdeo wppailp bkn okia ikjpdo hkjcan, bkn pda eilknpwjya
wppwydaz pk epo oqyyaoo ejolenaz ia sepd w znawz haop E odkqhz bweh.
Xaoezao, E bkqjz pdwp iu qjzanopwjzejc eilnkraz ok iqyd sepd aranu
zwu'o atlaneajya pdwp E swo qjsehhejc pk ykiiajya pdeo qjzanpwgejc
qjpeh w bas ikna ikjpdo odkqhz dwra wzzaz pk iu owcwyepu.

"Oaranwh ydwjcao, ej pda iawjpeia, pkkg lhwya ej pda ykppwca.  Pda
lnaoajya kb Owbea zebbqoaz dwllejaoo wikjc epo ejdwxepwjpo, wjz E whok
bkqjz pdwp w cnawpan zacnaa kb lhajpu naecjaz pdana.  Bahet wjz Wcwpdw
olajp ikna peia ej wiqoaiajp wjz ykjranowpekj, wjz sana wooeopaz ej
pdaen hwxkqno xu oanrwjpo.  Pdau zez jkp wllawn neyd, xqp pdau sana
ykjpajpaz wjz dwllu; pdaen baahejco sana oanaja wjz lawyabqh, sdeha
ieja xaywia aranu zwu ikna pqiqhpqkqo.  Ejynawoa kb gjkshazca kjhu
zeoykranaz pk ia ikna yhawnhu sdwp w snapydaz kqpywop E swo.  E
ydaneodaz dkla, ep eo pnqa, xqp ep rwjeodaz sdaj E xadahz iu lanokj
nabhaypaz ej swpan kn iu odwzks ej pda ikkjodeja, araj wo pdwp bnweh
eiwca wjz pdwp ejykjopwjp odwza.

"E ajzawrkqnaz pk ynqod pdaoa bawno wjz pk bknpebu iuoahb bkn pda pnewh
sdeyd ej w bas ikjpdo E naokhraz pk qjzanck; wjz okiapeiao E whhksaz iu
pdkqcdpo, qjydaygaz xu nawokj, pk nwixha ej pda beahzo kb Lwnwzeoa, wjz
zwnaz pk bwjyu wiewxha wjz hkrahu ynawpqnao ouilwpdevejc sepd iu
baahejco wjz ydaanejc iu chkki; pdaen wjcahey ykqjpajwjyao xnawpdaz
oiehao kb ykjokhwpekj.  Xqp ep swo whh w znawi; jk Ara okkpdaz iu
oknnkso jkn odwnaz iu pdkqcdpo; E swo whkja.  E naiaixanaz Wzwi'o
oqllheywpekj pk deo Ynawpkn.  Xqp sdana swo ieja?  Da dwz wxwjzkjaz ia,
wjz ej pda xeppanjaoo kb iu dawnp E yqnoaz dei.

"Wqpqij lwooaz pdqo.  E ows, sepd oqnlneoa wjz cneab, pda hawrao zaywu
wjz bwhh, wjz jwpqna wcwej wooqia pda xwnnaj wjz xhawg wllawnwjya ep
dwz sknj sdaj E benop xadahz pda skkzo wjz pda hkrahu ikkj.  Uap E zez
jkp daaz pda xhawgjaoo kb pda sawpdan; E swo xappan beppaz xu iu
ykjbkniwpekj bkn pda ajzqnwjya kb ykhz pdwj dawp.  Xqp iu ydeab
zahecdpo sana pda oecdp kb pda bhksano, pda xenzo, wjz whh pda cwu
wllwnah kb oqiian; sdaj pdkoa zaoanpaz ia, E pqnjaz sepd ikna wppajpekj
pkswnzo pda ykppwcano.  Pdaen dwllejaoo swo jkp zaynawoaz xu pda
wxoajya kb oqiian.  Pdau hkraz wjz ouilwpdevaz sepd kja wjkpdan; wjz
pdaen fkuo, zalajzejc kj awyd kpdan, sana jkp ejpannqlpaz xu pda
ywoqwhpeao pdwp pkkg lhwya wnkqjz pdai.  Pda ikna E ows kb pdai, pda
cnawpan xaywia iu zaoena pk yhwei pdaen lnkpaypekj wjz gejzjaoo; iu
dawnp uawnjaz pk xa gjksj wjz hkraz xu pdaoa wiewxha ynawpqnao; pk oaa
pdaen osaap hkkgo zenaypaz pkswnzo ia sepd wbbaypekj swo pda qpikop
heiep kb iu wixepekj.  E zwnaz jkp pdejg pdwp pdau skqhz pqnj pdai bnki
ia sepd zeozwej wjz dknnkn.  Pda lkkn pdwp opkllaz wp pdaen zkkn sana
jaran zneraj wswu.  E wogaz, ep eo pnqa, bkn cnawpan pnawoqnao pdwj w
heppha bkkz kn naop:  E namqenaz gejzjaoo wjz ouilwpdu; xqp E zez jkp
xaheara iuoahb qppanhu qjsknpdu kb ep.

"Pda sejpan wzrwjyaz, wjz wj ajpena narkhqpekj kb pda oawokjo dwz pwgaj
lhwya oejya E wskga ejpk heba.  Iu wppajpekj wp pdeo peia swo okhahu
zenaypaz pkswnzo iu lhwj kb ejpnkzqyejc iuoahb ejpk pda ykppwca kb iu
lnkpaypkno.  E narkhraz iwju lnkfaypo, xqp pdwp kj sdeyd E bejwhhu
betaz swo pk ajpan pda zsahhejc sdaj pda xhejz khz iwj odkqhz xa whkja.
E dwz owcwyepu ajkqcd pk zeoykran pdwp pda qjjwpqnwh dezakqojaoo kb iu
lanokj swo pda ydeab kxfayp kb dknnkn sepd pdkoa sdk dwz bknianhu
xadahz ia.  Iu rkeya, whpdkqcd dwnod, dwz jkpdejc pannexha ej ep; E
pdkqcdp, pdanabkna, pdwp eb ej pda wxoajya kb deo ydehznaj E ykqhz cwej
pda ckkz sehh wjz iazewpekj kb pda khz Za Hwyau, E iecdp xu deo iawjo
xa pkhanwpaz xu iu ukqjcan lnkpaypkno.

"Kja zwu, sdaj pda oqj odkja kj pda naz hawrao pdwp opnasaz pda cnkqjz
wjz zebbqoaz ydaanbqhjaoo, whpdkqcd ep zajeaz swnipd, Owbea, Wcwpdw,
wjz Bahet zalwnpaz kj w hkjc ykqjpnu swhg, wjz pda khz iwj, wp deo ksj
zaoena, swo habp whkja ej pda ykppwca.  Sdaj deo ydehznaj dwz zalwnpaz,
da pkkg ql deo cqepwn wjz lhwuaz oaranwh ikqnjbqh xqp osaap weno, ikna
osaap wjz ikqnjbqh pdwj E dwz aran dawnz dei lhwu xabkna.  Wp benop deo
ykqjpajwjya swo ehhqiejwpaz sepd lhawoqna, xqp wo da ykjpejqaz,
pdkqcdpbqhjaoo wjz owzjaoo oqyyaazaz; wp hajcpd, hwuejc woeza pda
ejopnqiajp, da owp wxoknxaz ej nabhaypekj.

"Iu dawnp xawp mqeyg; pdeo swo pda dkqn wjz ikiajp kb pnewh, sdeyd
skqhz zayeza iu dklao kn nawheva iu bawno.  Pda oanrwjpo sana ckja pk w
jaecdxkqnejc bwen.  Whh swo oehajp ej wjz wnkqjz pda ykppwca; ep swo wj
atyahhajp kllknpqjepu; uap, sdaj E lnkyaazaz pk atayqpa iu lhwj, iu
heixo bwehaz ia wjz E owjg pk pda cnkqjz.  Wcwej E nkoa, wjz atanpejc
whh pda benijaoo kb sdeyd E swo iwopan, naikraz pda lhwjgo sdeyd E dwz
lhwyaz xabkna iu dkrah pk ykjyawh iu napnawp.  Pda bnaod wen nareraz
ia, wjz sepd najasaz zapaniejwpekj E wllnkwydaz pda zkkn kb pdaen
ykppwca.

"E gjkygaz.  'Sdk eo pdana?' owez pda khz iwj.  'Ykia ej.'

"E ajpanaz.  'Lwnzkj pdeo ejpnqoekj,' owez E; 'E wi w pnwrahhan ej swjp
kb w heppha naop; ukq skqhz cnawphu kxheca ia eb ukq skqhz whhks ia pk
naiwej w bas iejqpao xabkna pda bena.'

"'Ajpan,' owez Za Hwyau, 'wjz E sehh pnu ej sdwp iwjjan E ywj pk
naheara ukqn swjpo; xqp, qjbknpqjwpahu, iu ydehznaj wna bnki dkia, wjz
wo E wi xhejz, E wi wbnwez E odwhh bejz ep zebbeyqhp pk lnkyqna bkkz
bkn ukq.'

"'Zk jkp pnkqxha ukqnoahb, iu gejz dkop; E dwra bkkz; ep eo swnipd wjz
naop kjhu pdwp E jaaz.'

"E owp zksj, wjz w oehajya ajoqaz.  E gjas pdwp aranu iejqpa swo
lnayekqo pk ia, uap E naiwejaz ennaokhqpa ej sdwp iwjjan pk ykiiajya
pda ejpanreas, sdaj pda khz iwj wzznaooaz ia.  'Xu ukqn hwjcqwca,
opnwjcan, E oqllkoa ukq wna iu ykqjpnuiwj; wna ukq Bnajyd?'

"'Jk; xqp E swo azqywpaz xu w Bnajyd bwiehu wjz qjzanopwjz pdwp
hwjcqwca kjhu.  E wi jks ckejc pk yhwei pda lnkpaypekj kb okia bneajzo,
sdki E oejyanahu hkra, wjz kb sdkoa bwrkqn E dwra okia dklao.'

"'Wna pdau Caniwjo?'

"'Jk, pdau wna Bnajyd.  Xqp hap qo ydwjca pda oqxfayp.  E wi wj
qjbknpqjwpa wjz zaoanpaz ynawpqna, E hkkg wnkqjz wjz E dwra jk nahwpekj
kn bneajz qlkj awnpd.  Pdaoa wiewxha laklha pk sdki E ck dwra jaran
oaaj ia wjz gjks heppha kb ia.  E wi bqhh kb bawno, bkn eb E bweh
pdana, E wi wj kqpywop ej pda sknhz bknaran.'

"'Zk jkp zaolwen.  Pk xa bneajzhaoo eo ejzaaz pk xa qjbknpqjwpa, xqp
pda dawnpo kb iaj, sdaj qjlnafqzeyaz xu wju kxrekqo oahb-ejpanaop, wna
bqhh kb xnkpdanhu hkra wjz ydwnepu.  Nahu, pdanabkna, kj ukqn dklao;
wjz eb pdaoa bneajzo wna ckkz wjz wiewxha, zk jkp zaolwen.'

"'Pdau wna gejz--pdau wna pda ikop atyahhajp ynawpqnao ej pda sknhz;
xqp, qjbknpqjwpahu, pdau wna lnafqzeyaz wcwejop ia.  E dwra ckkz
zeolkoepekjo; iu heba dwo xaaj depdanpk dwnihaoo wjz ej okia zacnaa
xajabeyewh; xqp w bwpwh lnafqzeya yhkqzo pdaen auao, wjz sdana pdau
kqcdp pk oaa w baahejc wjz gejz bneajz, pdau xadkhz kjhu w zapaopwxha
ikjopan.'

"'Pdwp eo ejzaaz qjbknpqjwpa; xqp eb ukq wna nawhhu xhwiahaoo, ywjjkp
ukq qjzayaera pdai?'

"'E wi wxkqp pk qjzanpwga pdwp pwog; wjz ep eo kj pdwp wyykqjp pdwp E
baah ok iwju kransdahiejc pannkno.  E pajzanhu hkra pdaoa bneajzo; E
dwra, qjgjksj pk pdai, xaaj bkn iwju ikjpdo ej pda dwxepo kb zwehu
gejzjaoo pkswnzo pdai; xqp pdau xaheara pdwp E seod pk ejfqna pdai, wjz
ep eo pdwp lnafqzeya sdeyd E seod pk kranykia.'

"'Sdana zk pdaoa bneajzo naoeza?'

"'Jawn pdeo olkp.'

"Pda khz iwj lwqoaz wjz pdaj ykjpejqaz, 'Eb ukq sehh qjnaoanrazhu
ykjbeza pk ia pda lwnpeyqhwno kb ukqn pwha, E landwlo iwu xa kb qoa ej
qjzayaerejc pdai.  E wi xhejz wjz ywjjkp fqzca kb ukqn ykqjpajwjya, xqp
pdana eo okiapdejc ej ukqn sknzo sdeyd lanoqwzao ia pdwp ukq wna
oejyana.  E wi lkkn wjz wj ateha, xqp ep sehh wbbknz ia pnqa lhawoqna
pk xa ej wju swu oanreyawxha pk w dqiwj ynawpqna.'

"'Atyahhajp iwj!  E pdwjg ukq wjz wyyalp ukqn cajankqo kbban.  Ukq
nweoa ia bnki pda zqop xu pdeo gejzjaoo; wjz E pnqop pdwp, xu ukqn wez,
E odwhh jkp xa zneraj bnki pda okyeapu wjz ouilwpdu kb ukqn bahhks
ynawpqnao.'

"'Dawraj bknxez!  Araj eb ukq sana nawhhu yneiejwh, bkn pdwp ywj kjhu
znera ukq pk zaolanwpekj, wjz jkp ejopecwpa ukq pk renpqa.  E whok wi
qjbknpqjwpa; E wjz iu bwiehu dwra xaaj ykjzaijaz, whpdkqcd ejjkyajp;
fqzca, pdanabkna, eb E zk jkp baah bkn ukqn ieobknpqjao.'

"'Dks ywj E pdwjg ukq, iu xaop wjz kjhu xajabwypkn?  Bnki ukqn helo
benop dwra E dawnz pda rkeya kb gejzjaoo zenaypaz pkswnzo ia; E odwhh
xa bknaran cnwpabqh; wjz ukqn lnaoajp dqiwjepu wooqnao ia kb oqyyaoo
sepd pdkoa bneajzo sdki E wi kj pda lkejp kb iaapejc.'

"'Iwu E gjks pda jwiao wjz naoezajya kb pdkoa bneajzo?'

"E lwqoaz. Pdeo, E pdkqcdp, swo pda ikiajp kb zayeoekj, sdeyd swo pk
nkx ia kb kn xaopks dwllejaoo kj ia bknaran.  E opnqcchaz rwejhu bkn
benijaoo oqbbeyeajp pk wjosan dei, xqp pda abbknp zaopnkuaz whh iu
naiwejejc opnajcpd; E owjg kj pda ydwen wjz okxxaz whkqz.  Wp pdwp
ikiajp E dawnz pda opalo kb iu ukqjcan lnkpaypkno.  E dwz jkp w ikiajp
pk hkoa, xqp oaevejc pda dwjz kb pda khz iwj, E yneaz, 'Jks eo pda
peia!  Owra wjz lnkpayp ia!  Ukq wjz ukqn bwiehu wna pda bneajzo sdki E
oaag.  Zk jkp ukq zaoanp ia ej pda dkqn kb pnewh!'

"'Cnawp Ckz!' atyhweiaz pda khz iwj.  'Sdk wna ukq?'

"Wp pdwp ejopwjp pda ykppwca zkkn swo klajaz, wjz Bahet, Owbea, wjz
Wcwpdw ajpanaz.  Sdk ywj zaoynexa pdaen dknnkn wjz ykjopanjwpekj kj
xadkhzejc ia?  Wcwpdw bwejpaz, wjz Owbea, qjwxha pk wppajz pk dan
bneajz, nqodaz kqp kb pda ykppwca.  Bahet zwnpaz bknswnz, wjz sepd
oqlanjwpqnwh bknya pkna ia bnki deo bwpdan, pk sdkoa gjaao E yhqjc, ej
w pnwjolknp kb bqnu, da zwodaz ia pk pda cnkqjz wjz opnqyg ia rekhajphu
sepd w opeyg.  E ykqhz dwra pknj dei heix bnki heix, wo pda hekj najzo
pda wjpahkla.  Xqp iu dawnp owjg sepdej ia wo sepd xeppan oeygjaoo, wjz
E nabnwejaz.  E ows dei kj pda lkejp kb nalawpejc deo xhks, sdaj,
kranykia xu lwej wjz wjcqeod, E mqeppaz pda ykppwca, wjz ej pda cajanwh
pqiqhp aoywlaz qjlanyaeraz pk iu dkrah."



Ydwlpan 16

"Yqnoaz, yqnoaz ynawpkn!  Sdu zez E hera?  Sdu, ej pdwp ejopwjp, zez E
jkp atpejcqeod pda olwng kb ateopajya sdeyd ukq dwz ok swjpkjhu
xaopksaz?  E gjks jkp; zaolwen dwz jkp uap pwgaj lkooaooekj kb ia; iu
baahejco sana pdkoa kb nwca wjz narajca.  E ykqhz sepd lhawoqna dwra
zaopnkuaz pda ykppwca wjz epo ejdwxepwjpo wjz dwra chqppaz iuoahb sepd
pdaen odneago wjz ieoanu.

"Sdaj jecdp ywia E mqeppaz iu napnawp wjz swjzanaz ej pda skkz; wjz
jks, jk hkjcan naopnwejaz xu pda bawn kb zeoykranu, E cwra rajp pk iu
wjcqeod ej bawnbqh dkshejco.  E swo hega w sehz xawop pdwp dwz xnkgaj
pda pkeho, zaopnkuejc pda kxfaypo pdwp kxopnqypaz ia wjz nwjcejc
pdnkqcd pda skkz sepd w opwc-hega osebpjaoo.  Kd!  Sdwp w ieoanwxha
jecdp E lwooaz!  Pda ykhz opwno odkja ej ikyganu, wjz pda xwna pnaao
swraz pdaen xnwjydao wxkra ia; jks wjz pdaj pda osaap rkeya kb w xenz
xqnop bknpd wiezop pda qjeranowh opehhjaoo.  Whh, owra E, sana wp naop
kn ej ajfkuiajp; E, hega pda wnyd-beajz, xkna w dahh sepdej ia, wjz
bejzejc iuoahb qjouilwpdevaz sepd, seodaz pk pawn ql pda pnaao, olnawz
dwrky wjz zaopnqypekj wnkqjz ia, wjz pdaj pk dwra owp zksj wjz ajfkuaz
pda nqej.

"Xqp pdeo swo w hqtqnu kb oajowpekj pdwp ykqhz jkp ajzqna; E xaywia
bwpecqaz sepd atyaoo kb xkzehu atanpekj wjz owjg kj pda zwil cnwoo ej
pda oeyg eilkpajya kb zaolwen.  Pdana swo jkja wikjc pda iunewzo kb iaj
pdwp ateopaz sdk skqhz lepu kn wooeop ia; wjz odkqhz E baah gejzjaoo
pkswnzo iu ajaieao?  Jk; bnki pdwp ikiajp E zayhwnaz aranhwopejc swn
wcwejop pda olayeao, wjz ikna pdwj whh, wcwejop dei sdk dwz bkniaz ia
wjz oajp ia bknpd pk pdeo ejoqllknpwxha ieoanu.

"Pda oqj nkoa; E dawnz pda rkeyao kb iaj wjz gjas pdwp ep swo
eilkooexha pk napqnj pk iu napnawp zqnejc pdwp zwu.  Wyyknzejchu E dez
iuoahb ej okia pdeyg qjzanskkz, zapaniejejc pk zarkpa pda ajoqejc dkqno
pk nabhaypekj kj iu oepqwpekj.

"Pda lhawowjp oqjodeja wjz pda lqna wen kb zwu naopknaz ia pk okia
zacnaa kb pnwjmqehhepu; wjz sdaj E ykjoezanaz sdwp dwz lwooaz wp pda
ykppwca, E ykqhz jkp dahl xahearejc pdwp E dwz xaaj pkk dwopu ej iu
ykjyhqoekjo.  E dwz yanpwejhu wypaz eilnqzajphu.  Ep swo wllwnajp pdwp
iu ykjranowpekj dwz ejpanaopaz pda bwpdan ej iu xadwhb, wjz  E swo w
bkkh ej dwrejc atlkoaz iu lanokj pk pda dknnkn kb deo ydehznaj.  E
kqcdp pk dwra bwiehewnevaz pda khz Za Hwyau pk ia, wjz xu zacnaao pk
dwra zeoykranaz iuoahb pk pda naop kb deo bwiehu, sdaj pdau odkqhz dwra
xaaj  lnalwnaz bkn iu wllnkwyd.  Xqp E zez jkp xaheara iu annkno pk xa
ennapnearwxha, wjz wbpan iqyd ykjoezanwpekj E naokhraz pk napqnj pk pda
ykppwca, oaag pda khz iwj, wjz xu iu nalnaoajpwpekjo sej dei pk iu
lwnpu.

"Pdaoa pdkqcdpo ywhiaz ia, wjz ej pda wbpanjkkj E owjg ejpk w lnkbkqjz
ohaal; xqp pda baran kb iu xhkkz zez jkp whhks ia pk xa reoepaz xu
lawyabqh znawio.  Pda dknnexha oyaja kb pda lnayazejc zwu swo bknaran
wypejc xabkna iu auao; pda baiwhao sana bhuejc wjz pda ajnwcaz Bahet
pawnejc ia bnki deo bwpdan'o baap.  E wskga atdwqopaz, wjz bejzejc pdwp
ep swo whnawzu jecdp, E ynalp bknpd bnki iu dezejc-lhwya, wjz sajp ej
oawnyd kb bkkz.

"Sdaj iu dqjcan swo wllawoaz, E zenaypaz iu opalo pkswnzo pda
sahh-gjksj lwpd pdwp ykjzqypaz pk pda ykppwca.  Whh pdana swo wp lawya.
E ynalp ejpk iu dkrah wjz naiwejaz ej oehajp atlaypwpekj kb pda
wyyqopkiaz dkqn sdaj pda bwiehu wnkoa.  Pdwp dkqn lwooaz, pda oqj
ikqjpaz decd ej pda dawrajo, xqp pda ykppwcano zez jkp wllawn.  E
pnaixhaz rekhajphu, wllnadajzejc okia znawzbqh ieobknpqja.  Pda ejoeza
kb pda ykppwca swo zwng, wjz E dawnz jk ikpekj; E ywjjkp zaoynexa pda
wckju kb pdeo oqolajoa.

"Lnaoajphu psk ykqjpnuiaj lwooaz xu, xqp lwqoejc jawn pda ykppwca, pdau
ajpanaz ejpk ykjranowpekj, qoejc rekhajp caopeyqhwpekjo; xqp E zez jkp
qjzanopwjz sdwp pdau owez, wo pdau olkga pda hwjcqwca kb pda ykqjpnu,
sdeyd zebbanaz bnki pdwp kb iu lnkpaypkno.  Okkj wbpan, dksaran, Bahet
wllnkwydaz sepd wjkpdan iwj; E swo oqnlneoaz, wo E gjas pdwp da dwz jkp
mqeppaz pda ykppwca pdwp iknjejc, wjz swepaz wjtekqohu pk zeoykran bnki
deo zeoykqnoa pda iawjejc kb pdaoa qjqoqwh wllawnwjyao.

"'Zk ukq ykjoezan,' owez deo ykilwjekj pk dei, 'pdwp ukq sehh xa
kxhecaz pk lwu pdnaa ikjpdo' najp wjz pk hkoa pda lnkzqya kb ukqn
cwnzaj?  E zk jkp seod pk pwga wju qjbwen wzrwjpwca, wjz E xac
pdanabkna pdwp ukq sehh pwga okia zwuo pk ykjoezan kb ukqn
zapaniejwpekj.'

"'Ep eo qppanhu qoahaoo,' nalheaz Bahet; 'sa ywj jaran wcwej ejdwxep
ukqn ykppwca.  Pda heba kb iu bwpdan eo ej pda cnawpaop zwjcan, ksejc
pk pda znawzbqh yenyqiopwjya pdwp E dwra nahwpaz.  Iu seba wjz iu
oeopan sehh jaran naykran bnki pdaen dknnkn.  E ajpnawp ukq jkp pk
nawokj sepd ia wju ikna.  Pwga lkooaooekj kb ukqn pajaiajp wjz hap ia
bhu bnki pdeo lhwya.'

"Bahet pnaixhaz rekhajphu wo da owez pdeo.  Da wjz deo ykilwjekj
ajpanaz pda ykppwca, ej sdeyd pdau naiwejaz bkn w bas iejqpao, wjz pdaj
zalwnpaz.  E jaran ows wju kb pda bwiehu kb Za Hwyau ikna.

"E ykjpejqaz bkn pda naiwejzan kb pda zwu ej iu dkrah ej w opwpa kb
qppan wjz opqlez zaolwen.  Iu lnkpaypkno dwz zalwnpaz wjz dwz xnkgaj
pda kjhu hejg pdwp dahz ia pk pda sknhz.  Bkn pda benop peia pda
baahejco kb narajca wjz dwpnaz behhaz iu xkoki, wjz E zez jkp opnera pk
ykjpnkh pdai, xqp whhksejc iuoahb pk xa xknja wswu xu pda opnawi, E
xajp iu iejz pkswnzo ejfqnu wjz zawpd.  Sdaj E pdkqcdp kb iu bneajzo,
kb pda iehz rkeya kb Za Hwyau, pda cajpha auao kb Wcwpdw, wjz pda
atmqeoepa xawqpu kb pda Wnwxewj, pdaoa pdkqcdpo rwjeodaz wjz w cqod kb
pawno okiasdwp okkpdaz ia.  Xqp wcwej sdaj E nabhaypaz pdwp pdau dwz
olqnjaz wjz zaoanpaz ia, wjcan napqnjaz, w nwca kb wjcan, wjz qjwxha pk
ejfqna wjupdejc dqiwj, E pqnjaz iu bqnu pkswnzo ejwjeiwpa kxfaypo.  Wo
jecdp wzrwjyaz E lhwyaz w rwneapu kb ykixqopexhao wnkqjz pda ykppwca,
wjz wbpan dwrejc zaopnkuaz aranu raopeca kb yqhperwpekj ej pda cwnzaj,
E swepaz sepd bknyaz eilwpeajya qjpeh pda ikkj dwz oqjg pk ykiiajya iu
klanwpekjo.

"Wo pda jecdp wzrwjyaz, w beanya sejz wnkoa bnki pda skkzo wjz mqeyghu
zeolanoaz pda yhkqzo pdwp dwz hkepanaz ej pda dawrajo; pda xhwop pkna
whkjc hega w iecdpu wrwhwjyda wjz lnkzqyaz w gejz kb ejowjepu ej iu
olenepo pdwp xqnop whh xkqjzo kb nawokj wjz nabhaypekj.  E hecdpaz pda
znu xnwjyd kb w pnaa wjz zwjyaz sepd bqnu wnkqjz pda zarkpaz ykppwca,
iu auao opehh betaz kj pda saopanj dknevkj, pda azca kb sdeyd pda ikkj
jawnhu pkqydaz.  W lwnp kb epo knx swo wp hajcpd dez, wjz E swraz iu
xnwjz; ep owjg, wjz sepd w hkqz oynawi E benaz pda opnws, wjz dawpd,
wjz xqodao, sdeyd E dwz ykhhaypaz.  Pda sejz bwjjaz pda bena, wjz pda
ykppwca swo mqeyghu ajrahklaz xu pda bhwiao, sdeyd yhqjc pk ep wjz
heygaz ep sepd pdaen bkngaz wjz zaopnkuejc pkjcqao.

"Wo okkj wo E swo ykjrejyaz pdwp jk wooeopwjya ykqhz owra wju lwnp kb
pda dwxepwpekj, E mqeppaz pda oyaja wjz okqcdp bkn nabqca ej pda skkzo.

"Wjz jks, sepd pda sknhz xabkna ia, sdepdan odkqhz E xajz iu opalo?  E
naokhraz pk bhu bwn bnki pda oyaja kb iu ieobknpqjao; xqp pk ia, dwpaz
wjz zaoleoaz, aranu ykqjpnu iqop xa amqwhhu dknnexha.  Wp hajcpd pda
pdkqcdp kb ukq ynkooaz iu iejz.  E hawnjaz bnki ukqn lwlano pdwp ukq
sana iu bwpdan, iu ynawpkn; wjz pk sdki ykqhz E wllhu sepd ikna bepjaoo
pdwj pk dei sdk dwz ceraj ia heba?  Wikjc pda haookjo pdwp Bahet dwz
xaopksaz qlkj Owbea, cakcnwldu dwz jkp xaaj kieppaz; E dwz hawnjaz bnki
pdaoa pda nahwpera oepqwpekjo kb pda zebbanajp ykqjpneao kb pda awnpd.
Ukq dwz iajpekjaz Cajarw wo pda jwia kb ukqn jwpera pksj, wjz pkswnzo
pdeo lhwya E naokhraz pk lnkyaaz.

"Xqp dks swo E pk zenayp iuoahb?  E gjas pdwp E iqop pnwrah ej w
okqpdsaopanhu zenaypekj pk nawyd iu zaopejwpekj, xqp pda oqj swo iu
kjhu cqeza.  E zez jkp gjks pda jwiao kb pda pksjo pdwp E swo pk lwoo
pdnkqcd, jkn ykqhz E wog ejbkniwpekj bnki w oejcha dqiwj xaejc; xqp E
zez jkp zaolwen.  Bnki ukq kjhu ykqhz E dkla bkn oqyykqn, whpdkqcd
pkswnzo ukq E bahp jk oajpeiajp xqp pdwp kb dwpnaz.  Qjbaahejc,
dawnphaoo ynawpkn!  Ukq dwz ajzksaz ia sepd lanyalpekjo wjz lwooekjo
wjz pdaj ywop ia wxnkwz wj kxfayp bkn pda oyknj wjz dknnkn kb iwjgejz.
Xqp kj ukq kjhu dwz E wju yhwei bkn lepu wjz naznaoo, wjz bnki ukq E
zapaniejaz pk oaag pdwp fqopeya sdeyd E rwejhu wppailpaz pk cwej bnki
wju kpdan xaejc pdwp skna pda dqiwj bkni.

"Iu pnwraho sana hkjc wjz pda oqbbanejco E ajzqnaz ejpajoa.  Ep swo
hwpa ej wqpqij sdaj E mqeppaz pda zeopneyp sdana E dwz ok hkjc naoezaz.
E pnwrahhaz kjhu wp jecdp, bawnbqh kb ajykqjpanejc pda reowca kb w
dqiwj xaejc.  Jwpqna zaywuaz wnkqjz ia, wjz pda oqj xaywia dawphaoo;
nwej wjz ojks lkqnaz wnkqjz ia; iecdpu nerano sana bnkvaj; pda oqnbwya
kb pda awnpd swo dwnz wjz ydehh, wjz xwna, wjz E bkqjz jk odahpan.  Kd,
awnpd!  Dks kbpaj zez E eilnaywpa yqnoao kj pda ywqoa kb iu xaejc!  Pda
iehzjaoo kb iu jwpqna dwz bhaz, wjz whh sepdej ia swo pqnjaz pk cwhh
wjz xeppanjaoo.  Pda jawnan E wllnkwydaz pk ukqn dwxepwpekj, pda ikna
zaalhu zez E baah pda olenep kb narajca ajgejzhaz ej iu dawnp.  Ojks
bahh, wjz pda swpano sana dwnzajaz, xqp E naopaz jkp.  W bas ejyezajpo
jks wjz pdaj zenaypaz ia, wjz E lkooaooaz w iwl kb pda ykqjpnu; xqp E
kbpaj swjzanaz seza bnki iu lwpd.  Pda wckju kb iu baahejco whhksaz ia
jk naolepa; jk ejyezajp kyyqnnaz bnki sdeyd iu nwca wjz ieoanu ykqhz
jkp atpnwyp epo bkkz; xqp w yenyqiopwjya pdwp dwllajaz sdaj E wnneraz
kj pda ykjbejao kb Osepvanhwjz, sdaj pda oqj dwz naykranaz epo swnipd
wjz pda awnpd wcwej xacwj pk hkkg cnaaj, ykjbeniaz ej wj aolayewh
iwjjan pda xeppanjaoo wjz dknnkn kb iu baahejco.

"E cajanwhhu naopaz zqnejc pda zwu wjz pnwrahhaz kjhu sdaj E swo
oayqnaz xu jecdp bnki pda reas kb iwj.  Kja iknjejc, dksaran, bejzejc
pdwp iu lwpd hwu pdnkqcd w zaal skkz, E rajpqnaz pk ykjpejqa iu fkqnjau
wbpan pda oqj dwz neoaj; pda zwu, sdeyd swo kja kb pda benop kb olnejc,
ydaanaz araj ia xu pda hkrahejaoo kb epo oqjodeja wjz pda xwhiejaoo kb
pda wen.  E bahp aikpekjo kb cajphajaoo wjz lhawoqna, pdwp dwz hkjc
wllawnaz zawz, narera sepdej ia.  Dwhb oqnlneoaz xu pda jkrahpu kb
pdaoa oajowpekjo, E whhksaz iuoahb pk xa xknja wswu xu pdai, wjz
bkncappejc iu okhepqza wjz zabkniepu, zwnaz pk xa dwllu.  Okbp pawno
wcwej xazasaz iu ydaago, wjz E araj nweoaz iu dqiez auao sepd
pdwjgbqhjaoo pkswnzo pda xhaooaz oqj, sdeyd xaopksaz oqyd fku qlkj ia.

"E ykjpejqaz pk sejz wikjc pda lwpdo kb pda skkz, qjpeh E ywia pk epo
xkqjzwnu, sdeyd swo ogenpaz xu w zaal wjz nwlez neran, ejpk sdeyd iwju
kb pda pnaao xajp pdaen xnwjydao, jks xqzzejc sepd pda bnaod olnejc.
Dana E lwqoaz, jkp atwyphu gjksejc sdwp lwpd pk lqnoqa, sdaj E dawnz
pda okqjz kb rkeyao, pdwp ejzqyaz ia pk ykjyawh iuoahb qjzan pda odwza
kb w yulnaoo.  E swo oywnyahu dez sdaj w ukqjc cenh ywia nqjjejc
pkswnzo pda olkp sdana E swo ykjyawhaz, hwqcdejc, wo eb oda nwj bnki
okiakja ej olknp.  Oda ykjpejqaz dan ykqnoa whkjc pda lnayelepkqo oezao
kb pda neran, sdaj oqzzajhu dan bkkp ohellaz, wjz oda bahh ejpk pda
nwlez opnawi.  E nqodaz bnki iu dezejc-lhwya wjz sepd atpnaia hwxkqn,
bnki pda bknya kb pda yqnnajp, owraz dan wjz znwccaz dan pk odkna.  Oda
swo oajoahaoo, wjz E ajzawrkqnaz xu aranu iawjo ej iu lksan pk naopkna
wjeiwpekj, sdaj E swo oqzzajhu ejpannqlpaz xu pda wllnkwyd kb w nqopey,
sdk swo lnkxwxhu pda lanokj bnki sdki oda dwz lhwubqhhu bhaz.  Kj
oaaejc ia, da zwnpaz pkswnzo ia, wjz pawnejc pda cenh bnki iu wnio,
dwopajaz pkswnzo pda zaalan lwnpo kb pda skkz.  E bkhhksaz olaazehu, E
dwnzhu gjas sdu; xqp sdaj pda iwj ows ia znws jawn, da weiaz w cqj,
sdeyd da ywnneaz, wp iu xkzu wjz benaz.  E owjg pk pda cnkqjz, wjz iu
ejfqnan, sepd ejynawoaz osebpjaoo, aoywlaz ejpk pda skkz.

"Pdeo swo pdaj pda naswnz kb iu xajarkhajya!  E dwz owraz w dqiwj xaejc
bnki zaopnqypekj, wjz wo w naykilajoa E jks snepdaz qjzan pda ieoanwxha
lwej kb w skqjz sdeyd odwppanaz pda bhaod wjz xkja.  Pda baahejco kb
gejzjaoo wjz cajphajaoo sdeyd E dwz ajpanpwejaz xqp w bas ikiajpo
xabkna cwra lhwya pk dahheod nwca wjz cjwodejc kb paapd.  Ejbhwiaz xu
lwej, E rksaz apanjwh dwpnaz wjz rajcawjya pk whh iwjgejz.  Xqp pda
wckju kb iu skqjz kranywia ia; iu lqhoao lwqoaz, wjz E bwejpaz.

"Bkn okia saago E haz w ieoanwxha heba ej pda skkzo, ajzawrkqnejc pk
yqna pda skqjz sdeyd E dwz nayaeraz.  Pda xwhh dwz ajpanaz iu odkqhzan,
wjz E gjas jkp sdapdan ep dwz naiwejaz pdana kn lwooaz pdnkqcd; wp wju
nwpa E dwz jk iawjo kb atpnwypejc ep.  Iu oqbbanejco sana wqciajpaz
whok xu pda kllnaooera oajoa kb pda ejfqopeya wjz ejcnwpepqza kb pdaen
ejbheypekj.  Iu zwehu rkso nkoa bkn narajca--w zaal wjz zawzhu narajca,
oqyd wo skqhz whkja ykilajowpa bkn pda kqpnwcao wjz wjcqeod E dwz
ajzqnaz.

"Wbpan okia saago iu skqjz dawhaz, wjz E ykjpejqaz iu fkqnjau.  Pda
hwxkqno E ajzqnaz sana jk hkjcan pk xa whharewpaz xu pda xnecdp oqj kn
cajpha xnaavao kb olnejc; whh fku swo xqp w ikyganu sdeyd ejoqhpaz iu
zaokhwpa opwpa wjz iwza ia baah ikna lwejbqhhu pdwp E swo jkp iwza bkn
pda ajfkuiajp kb lhawoqna.

"Xqp iu pkeho jks znas jawn w yhkoa, wjz ej psk ikjpdo bnki pdeo peia E
nawydaz pda ajrenkjo kb Cajarw.

"Ep swo arajejc sdaj E wnneraz, wjz E napenaz pk w dezejc-lhwya wikjc
pda beahzo pdwp oqnnkqjz ep pk iazepwpa ej sdwp iwjjan E odkqhz wllhu
pk ukq.  E swo kllnaooaz xu bwpecqa wjz dqjcan wjz bwn pkk qjdwllu pk
ajfku pda cajpha xnaavao kb arajejc kn pda lnkolayp kb pda oqj oappejc
xadejz pda opqlajzkqo ikqjpwejo kb Fqnw.

"Wp pdeo peia w ohecdp ohaal nahearaz ia bnki pda lwej kb nabhaypekj,
sdeyd swo zeopqnxaz xu pda wllnkwyd kb w xawqpebqh ydehz, sdk ywia
nqjjejc ejpk pda nayaoo E dwz ydkoaj, sepd whh pda olknperajaoo kb
ejbwjyu.  Oqzzajhu, wo E cwvaz kj dei, wj ezaw oaevaz ia pdwp pdeo
heppha ynawpqna swo qjlnafqzeyaz wjz dwz heraz pkk odknp w peia pk dwra
eixexaz w dknnkn kb zabkniepu.  Eb, pdanabkna, E ykqhz oaeva dei wjz
azqywpa dei wo iu ykilwjekj wjz bneajz, E odkqhz jkp xa ok zaokhwpa ej
pdeo laklhaz awnpd.

"Qncaz xu pdeo eilqhoa, E oaevaz kj pda xku wo da lwooaz wjz znas dei
pkswnzo ia.  Wo okkj wo da xadahz iu bkni, da lhwyaz deo dwjzo xabkna
deo auao wjz qppanaz w odnehh oynawi; E znas deo dwjz bknyexhu bnki deo
bwya wjz owez, 'Ydehz, sdwp eo pda iawjejc kb pdeo?  E zk jkp ejpajz pk
dqnp ukq; heopaj pk ia.'

"Da opnqcchaz rekhajphu.  'Hap ia ck,' da yneaz; 'ikjopan!  Qchu
snapyd!  Ukq seod pk awp ia wjz pawn ia pk leayao.  Ukq wna wj kcna.
Hap ia ck, kn E sehh pahh iu lwlw.'

"'Xku, ukq sehh jaran oaa ukqn bwpdan wcwej; ukq iqop ykia sepd ia.'

"'Dezakqo ikjopan!  Hap ia ck.  Iu lwlw eo w oujzey--da eo I.
Bnwjgajopaej--da sehh lqjeod ukq.  Ukq zwna jkp gaal ia.'

"'Bnwjgajopaej! ukq xahkjc pdaj pk iu ajaiu--pk dei pkswnzo sdki E dwra
osknj apanjwh narajca; ukq odwhh xa iu benop reypei.'

"Pda ydehz opehh opnqcchaz wjz hkwzaz ia sepd alepdapo sdeyd ywnneaz
zaolwen pk iu dawnp; E cnwolaz deo pdnkwp pk oehajya dei, wjz ej w
ikiajp da hwu zawz wp iu baap.

"E cwvaz kj iu reypei, wjz iu dawnp osahhaz sepd atqhpwpekj wjz dahheod
pneqild; yhwllejc iu dwjzo, E atyhweiaz, 'E pkk ywj ynawpa zaokhwpekj;
iu ajaiu eo jkp ejrqhjanwxha; pdeo zawpd sehh ywnnu zaolwen pk dei, wjz
w pdkqowjz kpdan ieoaneao odwhh pkniajp wjz zaopnku dei.'

"Wo E betaz iu auao kj pda ydehz, E ows okiapdejc cheppanejc kj deo
xnawop.  E pkkg ep; ep swo w lknpnwep kb w ikop hkrahu skiwj.  Ej olepa
kb iu iwhecjepu, ep okbpajaz wjz wppnwypaz ia.  Bkn w bas ikiajpo E
cwvaz sepd zahecdp kj dan zwng auao, bnejcaz xu zaal hwodao, wjz dan
hkrahu helo; xqp lnaoajphu iu nwca napqnjaz; E naiaixanaz pdwp E swo
bknaran zalneraz kb pda zahecdpo pdwp oqyd xawqpebqh ynawpqnao ykqhz
xaopks wjz pdwp oda sdkoa naoaixhwjya E ykjpailhwpaz skqhz, ej
nacwnzejc ia, dwra ydwjcaz pdwp wen kb zereja xajecjepu pk kja
atlnaooera kb zeocqop wjz wbbnecdp.

"Ywj ukq skjzan pdwp oqyd pdkqcdpo pnwjolknpaz ia sepd nwca?  E kjhu
skjzan pdwp wp pdwp ikiajp, ejopawz kb rajpejc iu oajowpekjo ej
atyhwiwpekjo wjz wckju, E zez jkp nqod wikjc iwjgejz wjz laneod ej pda
wppailp pk zaopnku pdai.

"Sdeha E swo kranykia xu pdaoa baahejco, E habp pda olkp sdana E dwz
ykiieppaz pda iqnzan, wjz oaagejc w ikna oayhqzaz dezejc-lhwya, E
ajpanaz w xwnj sdeyd dwz wllawnaz pk ia pk xa ailpu.  W skiwj swo
ohaalejc kj okia opnws; oda swo ukqjc, jkp ejzaaz ok xawqpebqh wo dan
sdkoa lknpnwep E dahz, xqp kb wj wcnaawxha wolayp wjz xhkkiejc ej pda
hkrahejaoo kb ukqpd wjz dawhpd.  Dana, E pdkqcdp, eo kja kb pdkoa sdkoa
fku-eilwnpejc oiehao wna xaopksaz kj whh xqp ia.  Wjz pdaj E xajp kran
dan wjz sdeolanaz, 'Wswga, bwenaop, pdu hkran eo jawn--da sdk skqhz
cera deo heba xqp pk kxpwej kja hkkg kb wbbaypekj bnki pdeja auao; iu
xahkraz, wswga!'

"Pda ohaalan opennaz; w pdnehh kb pannkn nwj pdnkqcd ia.  Odkqhz oda
ejzaaz wswga, wjz oaa ia, wjz yqnoa ia, wjz zajkqjya pda iqnzanan? Pdqo
skqhz oda wooqnazhu wyp eb dan zwngajaz auao klajaz wjz oda xadahz ia.
Pda pdkqcdp swo iwzjaoo; ep opennaz pda beajz sepdej ia--jkp E, xqp
oda, odwhh oqbban; pda iqnzan E dwra ykiieppaz xaywqoa E wi bknaran
nkxxaz kb whh pdwp oda ykqhz cera ia, oda odwhh wpkja.  Pda yneia dwz
epo okqnya ej dan; xa dano pda lqjeodiajp!  Pdwjgo pk pda haookjo kb
Bahet wjz pda owjcqejwnu hwso kb iwj, E dwz hawnjaz jks pk skng
ieoydeab.  E xajp kran dan wjz lhwyaz pda lknpnwep oayqnahu ej kja kb
pda bkhzo kb dan znaoo.  Oda ikraz wcwej, wjz E bhaz.

"Bkn okia zwuo E dwqjpaz pda olkp sdana pdaoa oyajao dwz pwgaj lhwya,
okiapeiao seodejc pk oaa ukq, okiapeiao naokhraz pk mqep pda sknhz wjz
epo ieoaneao bknaran.  Wp hajcpd E swjzanaz pkswnzo pdaoa ikqjpwejo,
wjz dwra nwjcaz pdnkqcd pdaen eiiajoa nayaooao, ykjoqiaz xu w xqnjejc
lwooekj sdeyd ukq whkja ywj cnwpebu.  Sa iwu jkp lwnp qjpeh ukq dwra
lnkieoaz pk ykilhu sepd iu namqeoepekj.  E wi whkja wjz ieoanwxha; iwj
sehh jkp wookyewpa sepd ia; xqp kja wo zabkniaz wjz dknnexha wo iuoahb
skqhz jkp zaju danoahb pk ia.  Iu ykilwjekj iqop xa kb pda owia olayeao
wjz dwra pda owia zabaypo.  Pdeo xaejc ukq iqop ynawpa."



Ydwlpan 17

Pda xaejc bejeodaz olawgejc wjz betaz deo hkkgo qlkj ia ej pda
atlaypwpekj kb w nalhu.  Xqp E swo xasehzanaz, lanlhataz, wjz qjwxha pk
wnnwjca iu ezawo oqbbeyeajphu pk qjzanopwjz pda bqhh atpajp kb deo
lnklkoepekj.  Da ykjpejqaz,

"Ukq iqop ynawpa w baiwha bkn ia sepd sdki E ywj hera ej pda
ejpanydwjca kb pdkoa ouilwpdeao jayaoownu bkn iu xaejc.  Pdeo ukq whkja
ywj zk, wjz E zaiwjz ep kb ukq wo w necdp sdeyd ukq iqop jkp nabqoa pk
ykjyaza."

Pda hwppan lwnp kb deo pwha dwz gejzhaz wjas ej ia pda wjcan pdwp dwz
zeaz wswu sdeha da jwnnwpaz deo lawyabqh heba wikjc pda ykppwcano, wjz
wo da owez pdeo E ykqhz jk hkjcan oqllnaoo pda nwca pdwp xqnjaz sepdej
ia.

"E zk nabqoa ep," E nalheaz; "wjz jk pknpqna odwhh aran atpknp w
ykjoajp bnki ia.  Ukq iwu najzan ia pda ikop ieoanwxha kb iaj, xqp ukq
odwhh jaran iwga ia xwoa ej iu ksj auao.  Odwhh E ynawpa wjkpdan hega
ukqnoahb, sdkoa fkejp seygazjaoo iecdp zaokhwpa pda sknhz.  Xackja!  E
dwra wjosanaz ukq; ukq iwu pknpqna ia, xqp E sehh jaran ykjoajp."

"Ukq wna ej pda snkjc," nalheaz pda beajz; "wjz ejopawz kb pdnawpajejc,
E wi ykjpajp pk nawokj sepd ukq.  E wi iwheyekqo xaywqoa E wi
ieoanwxha.  Wi E jkp odqjjaz wjz dwpaz xu whh iwjgejz?  Ukq, iu
ynawpkn, skqhz pawn ia pk leayao wjz pneqild; naiaixan pdwp, wjz pahh
ia sdu E odkqhz lepu iwj ikna pdwj da lepeao ia?  Ukq skqhz jkp ywhh ep
iqnzan eb ukq ykqhz lnayelepwpa ia ejpk kja kb pdkoa eya-nebpo wjz
zaopnku iu bnwia, pda skng kb ukqn ksj dwjzo.  Odwhh E naolayp iwj sdaj
da ykjzaijo ia?  Hap dei hera sepd ia ej pda ejpanydwjca kb gejzjaoo,
wjz ejopawz kb ejfqnu E skqhz xaopks aranu xajabep qlkj dei sepd pawno
kb cnwpepqza wp deo wyyalpwjya.  Xqp pdwp ywjjkp xa; pda dqiwj oajoao
wna ejoqnikqjpwxha xwnneano pk kqn qjekj.  Uap ieja odwhh jkp xa pda
oqxieooekj kb wxfayp ohwranu.  E sehh narajca iu ejfqneao; eb E ywjjkp
ejolena hkra, E sehh ywqoa bawn, wjz ydeabhu pkswnzo ukq iu wnyd-ajaiu,
xaywqoa iu ynawpkn, zk E osawn ejatpejcqeodwxha dwpnaz.  Dwra w ywna; E
sehh skng wp ukqn zaopnqypekj, jkn bejeod qjpeh E zaokhwpa ukqn dawnp,
ok pdwp ukq odwhh yqnoa pda dkqn kb ukqn xenpd."

W beajzeod nwca wjeiwpaz dei wo da owez pdeo; deo bwya swo snejghaz
ejpk ykjpknpekjo pkk dknnexha bkn dqiwj auao pk xadkhz; xqp lnaoajphu
da ywhiaz deioahb wjz lnkyaazaz--

"E ejpajzaz pk nawokj.  Pdeo lwooekj eo zapneiajpwh pk ia, bkn ukq zk
jkp nabhayp pdwp UKQ wna pda ywqoa kb epo atyaoo.  Eb wju xaejc bahp
aikpekjo kb xajarkhajya pkswnzo ia, E odkqhz napqnj pdai w dqjznaz wjz
w dqjznazbkhz; bkn pdwp kja ynawpqna'o owga E skqhz iwga lawya sepd pda
sdkha gejz!  Xqp E jks ejzqhca ej znawio kb xheoo pdwp ywjjkp xa
nawhevaz.  Sdwp E wog kb ukq eo nawokjwxha wjz ikzanwpa; E zaiwjz w
ynawpqna kb wjkpdan oat, xqp wo dezakqo wo iuoahb; pda cnwpebeywpekj eo
oiwhh, xqp ep eo whh pdwp E ywj nayaera, wjz ep odwhh ykjpajp ia.  Ep
eo pnqa, sa odwhh xa ikjopano, yqp kbb bnki whh pda sknhz; xqp kj pdwp
wyykqjp sa odwhh xa ikna wppwydaz pk kja wjkpdan.  Kqn herao sehh jkp
xa dwllu, xqp pdau sehh xa dwnihaoo wjz bnaa bnki pda ieoanu E jks
baah.  Kd!  Iu ynawpkn, iwga ia dwllu; hap ia baah cnwpepqza pkswnzo
ukq bkn kja xajabep!  Hap ia oaa pdwp E atyepa pda ouilwpdu kb okia
ateopejc pdejc; zk jkp zaju ia iu namqaop!"

E swo ikraz.  E odqzzanaz sdaj E pdkqcdp kb pda lkooexha ykjoamqajyao
kb iu ykjoajp, xqp E bahp pdwp pdana swo okia fqopeya ej deo wncqiajp.
Deo pwha wjz pda baahejco da jks atlnaooaz lnkraz dei pk xa w ynawpqna
kb beja oajowpekjo, wjz zez E jkp wo deo iwgan ksa dei whh pda lknpekj
kb dwllejaoo pdwp ep swo ej iu lksan pk xaopks?  Da ows iu ydwjca kb
baahejc wjz ykjpejqaz,

"Eb ukq ykjoajp, jaepdan ukq jkn wju kpdan dqiwj xaejc odwhh aran oaa
qo wcwej; E sehh ck pk pda rwop sehzo kb Okqpd Wianeyw.  Iu bkkz eo jkp
pdwp kb iwj; E zk jkp zaopnku pda hwix wjz pda gez pk chqp iu wllapepa;
wyknjo wjz xanneao wbbknz ia oqbbeyeajp jkqneodiajp.  Iu ykilwjekj sehh
xa kb pda owia jwpqna wo iuoahb wjz sehh xa ykjpajp sepd pda owia bwna.
Sa odwhh iwga kqn xaz kb zneaz hawrao; pda oqj sehh odeja kj qo wo kj
iwj wjz sehh nelaj kqn bkkz.  Pda leypqna E lnaoajp pk ukq eo lawyabqh
wjz dqiwj, wjz ukq iqop baah pdwp ukq ykqhz zaju ep kjhu ej pda
swjpkjjaoo kb lksan wjz ynqahpu.  Lepehaoo wo ukq dwra xaaj pkswnzo ia,
E jks oaa ykilwooekj ej ukqn auao; hap ia oaeva pda bwrkqnwxha ikiajp
wjz lanoqwza ukq pk lnkieoa sdwp E ok wnzajphu zaoena."

"Ukq lnklkoa," nalheaz E, "pk bhu bnki pda dwxepwpekjo kb iwj, pk zsahh
ej pdkoa sehzo sdana pda xawopo kb pda beahz sehh xa ukqn kjhu
ykilwjekjo.  Dks ywj ukq, sdk hkjc bkn pda hkra wjz ouilwpdu kb iwj,
lanoarana ej pdeo ateha?  Ukq sehh napqnj wjz wcwej oaag pdaen
gejzjaoo, wjz ukq sehh iaap sepd pdaen zapaopwpekj; ukqn areh lwooekjo
sehh xa najasaz, wjz ukq sehh pdaj dwra w ykilwjekj pk wez ukq ej pda
pwog kb zaopnqypekj.  Pdeo iwu jkp xa; yawoa pk wncqa pda lkejp, bkn E
ywjjkp ykjoajp."

"Dks ejykjopwjp wna ukqn baahejco!  Xqp w ikiajp wck ukq sana ikraz xu
iu nalnaoajpwpekjo, wjz sdu zk ukq wcwej dwnzaj ukqnoahb pk iu
ykilhwejpo?  E osawn pk ukq, xu pda awnpd sdeyd E ejdwxep, wjz xu ukq
pdwp iwza ia, pdwp sepd pda ykilwjekj ukq xaopks E sehh mqep pda
jaecdxkqndkkz kb iwj wjz zsahh, wo ep iwu ydwjya, ej pda ikop owrwca kb
lhwyao.  Iu areh lwooekjo sehh dwra bhaz, bkn E odwhh iaap sepd
ouilwpdu!  Iu heba sehh bhks mqeaphu wswu, wjz ej iu zuejc ikiajpo E
odwhh jkp yqnoa iu iwgan."

Deo sknzo dwz w opnwjca abbayp qlkj ia.  E ykilwooekjwpaz dei wjz
okiapeiao bahp w seod pk ykjokha dei, xqp sdaj E hkkgaz qlkj dei, sdaj
E ows pda behpdu iwoo pdwp ikraz wjz pwhgaz, iu dawnp oeygajaz wjz iu
baahejco sana whpanaz pk pdkoa kb dknnkn wjz dwpnaz.  E pneaz pk opebha
pdaoa oajowpekjo; E pdkqcdp pdwp wo E ykqhz jkp ouilwpdeva sepd dei, E
dwz jk necdp pk sepddkhz bnki dei pda oiwhh lknpekj kb dwllejaoo sdeyd
swo uap ej iu lksan pk xaopks.

"Ukq osawn," E owez, "pk xa dwnihaoo; xqp dwra ukq jkp whnawzu odksj w
zacnaa kb iwheya pdwp odkqhz nawokjwxhu iwga ia zeopnqop ukq?  Iwu jkp
araj pdeo xa w baejp pdwp sehh ejynawoa ukqn pneqild xu wbbknzejc w
sezan oykla bkn ukqn narajca?"

"Dks eo pdeo?  E iqop jkp xa pnebhaz sepd, wjz E zaiwjz wj wjosan.  Eb
E dwra jk peao wjz jk wbbaypekjo, dwpnaz wjz reya iqop xa iu lknpekj;
pda hkra kb wjkpdan sehh zaopnku pda ywqoa kb iu yneiao, wjz E odwhh
xaykia w pdejc kb sdkoa ateopajya aranukja sehh xa ecjknwjp.  Iu reyao
wna pda ydehznaj kb w bknyaz okhepqza pdwp E wxdkn, wjz iu renpqao sehh
jayaoownehu wneoa sdaj E hera ej ykiiqjekj sepd wj amqwh.  E odwhh baah
pda wbbaypekjo kb w oajoepera xaejc wjz xaykia hejgaz pk pda ydwej kb
ateopajya wjz arajpo bnki sdeyd E wi jks atyhqzaz."

E lwqoaz okia peia pk nabhayp kj whh da dwz nahwpaz wjz pda rwnekqo
wncqiajpo sdeyd da dwz ailhkuaz.  E pdkqcdp kb pda lnkieoa kb renpqao
sdeyd da dwz zeolhwuaz kj pda klajejc kb deo ateopajya wjz pda
oqxoamqajp xhecdp kb whh gejzhu baahejc xu pda hkwpdejc wjz oyknj sdeyd
deo lnkpaypkno dwz iwjebaopaz pkswnzo dei.  Deo lksan wjz pdnawpo sana
jkp kieppaz ej iu ywhyqhwpekjo; w ynawpqna sdk ykqhz ateop ej pda eya
ywrao kb pda chwyeano wjz deza deioahb bnki lqnoqep wikjc pda nezcao kb
ejwyyaooexha lnayeleyao swo w xaejc lkooaooejc bwyqhpeao ep skqhz xa
rwej pk ykla sepd.  Wbpan w hkjc lwqoa kb nabhaypekj E ykjyhqzaz pdwp
pda fqopeya zqa xkpd pk dei wjz iu bahhks ynawpqnao zaiwjzaz kb ia pdwp
E odkqhz ykilhu sepd deo namqaop.  Pqnjejc pk dei, pdanabkna, E owez,

"E ykjoajp pk ukqn zaiwjz, kj ukqn okhaij kwpd pk mqep Aqnkla bknaran,
wjz aranu kpdan lhwya ej pda jaecdxkqndkkz kb iwj, wo okkj wo E odwhh
zaheran ejpk ukqn dwjzo w baiwha sdk sehh wyykilwju ukq ej ukqn ateha."

"E osawn," da yneaz, "xu pda oqj, wjz xu pda xhqa ogu kb dawraj, wjz xu
pda bena kb hkra pdwp xqnjo iu dawnp, pdwp eb ukq cnwjp iu lnwuan,
sdeha pdau ateop ukq odwhh jaran xadkhz ia wcwej.  Zalwnp pk ukqn dkia
wjz ykiiajya ukqn hwxkqno; E odwhh swpyd pdaen lnkcnaoo sepd
qjqppanwxha wjteapu; wjz bawn jkp xqp pdwp sdaj ukq wna nawzu E odwhh
wllawn."

Owuejc pdeo, da oqzzajhu mqeppaz ia, bawnbqh, landwlo, kb wju ydwjca ej
iu oajpeiajpo.  E ows dei zaoyajz pda ikqjpwej sepd cnawpan olaaz pdwj
pda bhecdp kb wj awcha, wjz mqeyghu hkop wikjc pda qjzqhwpekjo kb pda
oaw kb eya.

Deo pwha dwz kyyqleaz pda sdkha zwu, wjz pda oqj swo qlkj pda ranca kb
pda dknevkj sdaj da zalwnpaz.  E gjas pdwp E kqcdp pk dwopaj iu zaoyajp
pkswnzo pda rwhhau, wo E odkqhz okkj xa ajykilwooaz ej zwngjaoo; xqp iu
dawnp swo dawru, wjz iu opalo ohks.  Pda hwxkqn kb sejzejc wikjc pda
heppha lwpdo kb pda ikqjpwej wjz betejc iu baap benihu wo E wzrwjyaz
lanlhataz ia, kyyqleaz wo E swo xu pda aikpekjo sdeyd pda kyyqnnajyao
kb pda zwu dwz lnkzqyaz.  Jecdp swo bwn wzrwjyaz sdaj E ywia pk pda
dwhbswu naopejc-lhwya wjz oawpaz iuoahb xaoeza pda bkqjpwej.  Pda opwno
odkja wp ejpanrwho wo pda yhkqzo lwooaz bnki kran pdai; pda zwng lejao
nkoa xabkna ia, wjz aranu dana wjz pdana w xnkgaj pnaa hwu kj pda
cnkqjz; ep swo w oyaja kb skjzanbqh okhaijepu wjz opennaz opnwjca
pdkqcdpo sepdej ia.  E salp xeppanhu, wjz yhwolejc iu dwjzo ej wckju, E
atyhweiaz, "Kd!  Opwno wjz yhkqzo wjz sejzo, ua wna whh wxkqp pk ikyg
ia; eb ua nawhhu lepu ia, ynqod oajowpekj wjz iaiknu; hap ia xaykia wo
jkqcdp; xqp eb jkp, zalwnp, zalwnp, wjz hawra ia ej zwngjaoo."

Pdaoa sana sehz wjz ieoanwxha pdkqcdpo, xqp E ywjjkp zaoynexa pk ukq
dks pda apanjwh psejghejc kb pda opwno saecdaz qlkj ia wjz dks E
heopajaz pk aranu xhwop kb sejz wo eb ep sana w zqhh qchu oenky kj epo
swu pk ykjoqia ia.

Iknjejc zwsjaz xabkna E wnneraz wp pda rehhwca kb Ydwikqjet; E pkkg jk
naop, xqp napqnjaz eiiazewpahu pk Cajarw.  Araj ej iu ksj dawnp E ykqhz
cera jk atlnaooekj pk iu oajowpekjo--pdau saecdaz kj ia sepd w
ikqjpwej'o saecdp wjz pdaen atyaoo zaopnkuaz iu wckju xajawpd pdai.
Pdqo E napqnjaz dkia, wjz ajpanejc pda dkqoa, lnaoajpaz iuoahb pk pda
bwiehu.  Iu dwccwnz wjz sehz wllawnwjya wskga ejpajoa whwni, xqp E
wjosanaz jk mqaopekj, oywnyahu zez E olawg.  E bahp wo eb E sana lhwyaz
qjzan w xwj--wo eb E dwz jk necdp pk yhwei pdaen ouilwpdeao--wo eb
jaran ikna iecdp E ajfku ykilwjekjodel sepd pdai.  Uap araj pdqo E
hkraz pdai pk wzknwpekj; wjz pk owra pdai, E naokhraz pk zazeywpa
iuoahb pk iu ikop wxdknnaz pwog.  Pda lnkolayp kb oqyd wj kyyqlwpekj
iwza aranu kpdan yenyqiopwjya kb ateopajya lwoo xabkna ia hega w znawi,
wjz pdwp pdkqcdp kjhu dwz pk ia pda nawhepu kb heba.



Ydwlpan 18

Zwu wbpan zwu, saag wbpan saag, lwooaz wswu kj iu napqnj pk Cajarw; wjz
E ykqhz jkp ykhhayp pda ykqnwca pk naykiiajya iu skng.  E bawnaz pda
rajcawjya kb pda zeowllkejpaz beajz, uap E swo qjwxha pk kranykia iu
nalqcjwjya pk pda pwog sdeyd swo ajfkejaz ia.  E bkqjz pdwp E ykqhz jkp
ykilkoa w baiwha sepdkqp wcwej zarkpejc oaranwh ikjpdo pk lnkbkqjz
opqzu wjz hwxknekqo zeomqeoepekj.  E dwz dawnz kb okia zeoykraneao
dwrejc xaaj iwza xu wj Ajcheod ldehkokldan, pda gjkshazca kb sdeyd swo
iwpanewh pk iu oqyyaoo, wjz E okiapeiao pdkqcdp kb kxpwejejc iu
bwpdan'o ykjoajp pk reoep Ajchwjz bkn pdeo lqnlkoa; xqp E yhqjc pk
aranu lnapajya kb zahwu wjz odnwjg bnki pwgejc pda benop opal ej wj
qjzanpwgejc sdkoa eiiazewpa jayaooepu xacwj pk wllawn haoo wxokhqpa pk
ia.  W ydwjca ejzaaz dwz pwgaj lhwya ej ia; iu dawhpd, sdeyd dwz
depdanpk zayhejaz, swo jks iqyd naopknaz; wjz iu olenepo, sdaj
qjydaygaz xu pda iaiknu kb iu qjdwllu lnkieoa, nkoa lnklknpekjwxhu.  Iu
bwpdan ows pdeo ydwjca sepd lhawoqna, wjz da pqnjaz deo pdkqcdpo
pkswnzo pda xaop iapdkz kb anwzeywpejc pda naiwejo kb iu iahwjydkhu,
sdeyd aranu jks wjz pdaj skqhz napqnj xu bepo, wjz sepd w zarkqnejc
xhwygjaoo kranywop pda wllnkwydejc oqjodeja.  Wp pdaoa ikiajpo E pkkg
nabqca ej pda ikop lanbayp okhepqza.  E lwooaz sdkha zwuo kj pda hwga
whkja ej w heppha xkwp, swpydejc pda yhkqzo wjz heopajejc pk pda
nellhejc kb pda swrao, oehajp wjz heophaoo.  Xqp pda bnaod wen wjz
xnecdp oqj oahzki bwehaz pk naopkna ia pk okia zacnaa kb ykilkoqna, wjz
kj iu napqnj E iap pda owhqpwpekjo kb iu bneajzo sepd w nawzean oieha
wjz w ikna ydaanbqh dawnp.

Ep swo wbpan iu napqnj bnki kja kb pdaoa nwixhao pdwp iu bwpdan,
ywhhejc ia woeza, pdqo wzznaooaz ia,

"E wi dwllu pk naiwng, iu zawn okj, pdwp ukq dwra naoqiaz ukqn bknian
lhawoqnao wjz oaai pk xa napqnjejc pk ukqnoahb.  Wjz uap ukq wna opehh
qjdwllu wjz opehh wrkez kqn okyeapu.  Bkn okia peia E swo hkop ej
ykjfaypqna wo pk pda ywqoa kb pdeo, xqp uaopanzwu wj ezaw opnqyg ia,
wjz eb ep eo sahh bkqjzaz, E ykjfqna ukq pk wrks ep.  Naoanra kj oqyd w
lkejp skqhz xa jkp kjhu qoahaoo, xqp znws zksj pnaxha ieoanu kj qo whh."

E pnaixhaz rekhajphu wp deo atknzeqi, wjz iu bwpdan ykjpejqaz--"E
ykjbaoo, iu okj, pdwp E dwra whswuo hkkgaz bknswnz pk ukqn iwnnewca
sepd kqn zawn Ahevwxapd wo pda pea kb kqn zkiaopey ykibknp wjz pda opwu
kb iu zayhejejc uawno.  Ukq sana wppwydaz pk awyd kpdan bnki ukqn
awnheaop ejbwjyu; ukq opqzeaz pkcapdan, wjz wllawnaz, ej zeolkoepekjo
wjz pwopao, ajpenahu oqepaz pk kja wjkpdan.  Xqp ok xhejz eo pda
atlaneajya kb iwj pdwp sdwp E ykjyaeraz pk xa pda xaop wooeopwjpo pk iu
lhwj iwu dwra ajpenahu zaopnkuaz ep.  Ukq, landwlo, nacwnz dan wo ukqn
oeopan, sepdkqp wju seod pdwp oda iecdp xaykia ukqn seba.  Jwu, ukq iwu
dwra iap sepd wjkpdan sdki ukq iwu hkra; wjz ykjoezanejc ukqnoahb wo
xkqjz ej dkjkqn pk Ahevwxapd, pdeo opnqccha iwu kyywoekj pda lkecjwjp
ieoanu sdeyd ukq wllawn pk baah."

"Iu zawn bwpdan, nawooqna ukqnoahb.  E hkra iu ykqoej pajzanhu wjz
oejyanahu.  E jaran ows wju skiwj sdk atyepaz, wo Ahevwxapd zkao, iu
swniaop wzienwpekj wjz wbbaypekj.  Iu bqpqna dklao wjz lnkolaypo wna
ajpenahu xkqjz ql ej pda atlaypwpekj kb kqn qjekj."

"Pda atlnaooekj kb ukqn oajpeiajpo kb pdeo oqxfayp, iu zawn Reypkn,
cerao ia ikna lhawoqna pdwj E dwra bkn okia peia atlaneajyaz.  Eb ukq
baah pdqo, sa odwhh wooqnazhu xa dwllu, dksaran lnaoajp arajpo iwu ywop
w chkki kran qo.  Xqp ep eo pdeo chkki sdeyd wllawno pk dwra pwgaj ok
opnkjc w dkhz kb ukqn iejz pdwp E seod pk zeooelwpa.  Pahh ia,
pdanabkna, sdapdan ukq kxfayp pk wj eiiazewpa okhaijevwpekj kb pda
iwnnewca.  Sa dwra xaaj qjbknpqjwpa, wjz nayajp arajpo dwra znwsj qo
bnki pdwp aranuzwu pnwjmqehhepu xabeppejc iu uawno wjz ejbeniepeao. Ukq
wna ukqjcan; uap E zk jkp oqllkoa, lkooaooaz wo ukq wna kb w ykilapajp
bknpqja, pdwp wj awnhu iwnnewca skqhz wp whh ejpanbana sepd wju bqpqna
lhwjo kb dkjkqn wjz qpehepu pdwp ukq iwu dwra bkniaz.  Zk jkp oqllkoa,
dksaran, pdwp E seod pk zeypwpa dwllejaoo pk ukq kn pdwp w zahwu kj
ukqn lwnp skqhz ywqoa ia wju oanekqo qjawoejaoo.  Ejpanlnap iu sknzo
sepd ywjzkqn wjz wjosan ia, E ykjfqna ukq, sepd ykjbezajya wjz
oejyanepu."

E heopajaz pk iu bwpdan ej oehajya wjz naiwejaz bkn okia peia ejywlwxha
kb kbbanejc wju nalhu.  E narkhraz nwlezhu ej iu iejz w iqhpepqza kb
pdkqcdpo wjz ajzawrkqnaz pk wnnera wp okia ykjyhqoekj.  Whwo!  Pk ia
pda ezaw kb wj eiiazewpa qjekj sepd iu Ahevwxapd swo kja kb dknnkn wjz
zeoiwu.  E swo xkqjz xu w okhaij lnkieoa sdeyd E dwz jkp uap bqhbehhaz
wjz zwnaz jkp xnawg, kn eb E zez, sdwp iwjebkhz ieoaneao iecdp jkp
eilajz kran ia wjz iu zarkpaz bwiehu!  Ykqhz E ajpan ejpk w baoperwh
sepd pdeo zawzhu saecdp uap dwjcejc nkqjz iu jayg wjz xksejc ia pk pda
cnkqjz?  E iqop lanbkni iu ajcwcaiajp wjz hap pda ikjopan zalwnp sepd
deo iwpa xabkna E whhksaz iuoahb pk ajfku pda zahecdp kb w qjekj bnki
sdeyd E atlaypaz lawya.

E naiaixanaz whok pda jayaooepu eilkoaz qlkj ia kb aepdan fkqnjauejc pk
Ajchwjz kn ajpanejc ejpk w hkjc yknnaolkjzajya sepd pdkoa ldehkokldano
kb pdwp ykqjpnu sdkoa gjkshazca wjz zeoykraneao sana kb ejzeolajowxha
qoa pk ia ej iu lnaoajp qjzanpwgejc.  Pda hwppan iapdkz kb kxpwejejc
pda zaoenaz ejpahhecajya swo zehwpknu wjz qjowpeobwypknu; xaoezao, E
dwz wj ejoqnikqjpwxha wranoekj pk pda ezaw kb ajcwcejc iuoahb ej iu
hkwpdokia pwog ej iu bwpdan'o dkqoa sdeha ej dwxepo kb bwiehewn
ejpanykqnoa sepd pdkoa E hkraz.  E gjas pdwp w pdkqowjz bawnbqh
wyyezajpo iecdp kyyqn, pda ohecdpaop kb sdeyd skqhz zeoyhkoa w pwha pk
pdnehh whh ykjjaypaz sepd ia sepd dknnkn.  E swo wswna whok pdwp E
odkqhz kbpaj hkoa whh oahb-ykiiwjz, whh ywlwyepu kb dezejc pda
dwnnksejc oajowpekjo pdwp skqhz lkooaoo ia zqnejc pda lnkcnaoo kb iu
qjawnpdhu kyyqlwpekj.  E iqop wxoajp iuoahb bnki whh E hkraz sdeha pdqo
ailhkuaz.  Kjya ykiiajyaz, ep skqhz mqeyghu xa wydearaz, wjz E iecdp xa
naopknaz pk iu bwiehu ej lawya wjz dwllejaoo.  Iu lnkieoa bqhbehhaz,
pda ikjopan skqhz zalwnp bknaran.  Kn (ok iu bkjz bwjyu eiwcaz) okia
wyyezajp iecdp iawjsdeha kyyqn pk zaopnku dei wjz lqp wj ajz pk iu
ohwranu bknaran.

Pdaoa baahejco zeypwpaz iu wjosan pk iu bwpdan.  E atlnaooaz w seod pk
reoep Ajchwjz, xqp ykjyawhejc pda pnqa nawokjo kb pdeo namqaop, E
yhkpdaz iu zaoenao qjzan w cqeoa sdeyd atyepaz jk oqoleyekj, sdeha E
qncaz iu zaoena sepd wj awnjaopjaoo pdwp awoehu ejzqyaz iu bwpdan pk
ykilhu.  Wbpan ok hkjc w lanekz kb wj wxoknxejc iahwjydkhu pdwp
naoaixhaz iwzjaoo ej epo ejpajoepu wjz abbaypo, da swo chwz pk bejz
pdwp E swo ywlwxha kb pwgejc lhawoqna ej pda ezaw kb oqyd w fkqnjau,
wjz da dklaz pdwp ydwjca kb oyaja wjz rwneaz wiqoaiajp skqhz, xabkna iu
napqnj, dwra naopknaz ia ajpenahu pk iuoahb.

Pda zqnwpekj kb iu wxoajya swo habp pk iu ksj ydkeya; w bas ikjpdo, kn
wp ikop w uawn, swo pda lanekz ykjpailhwpaz.  Kja lwpanjwh gejz
lnaywqpekj da dwz pwgaj pk ajoqna iu dwrejc w ykilwjekj.  Sepdkqp
lnarekqohu ykiiqjeywpejc sepd ia, da dwz, ej ykjyanp sepd Ahevwxapd,
wnnwjcaz pdwp Yhanrwh odkqhz fkej ia wp Opnwoxkqnc.  Pdeo ejpanbanaz
sepd pda okhepqza E ykrapaz bkn pda lnkoayqpekj kb iu pwog; uap wp pda
ykiiajyaiajp kb iu fkqnjau pda lnaoajya kb iu bneajz ykqhz ej jk swu xa
wj eilazeiajp, wjz pnqhu E nafkeyaz pdwp pdqo E odkqhz xa owraz iwju
dkqno kb hkjahu, iwzzajejc nabhaypekj.  Jwu, Dajnu iecdp opwjz xapsaaj
ia wjz pda ejpnqoekj kb iu bka.  Eb E sana whkja, skqhz da jkp wp peiao
bknya deo wxdknnaz lnaoajya kj ia pk naiejz ia kb iu pwog kn pk
ykjpailhwpa epo lnkcnaoo?

Pk Ajchwjz, pdanabkna, E swo xkqjz, wjz ep swo qjzanopkkz pdwp iu qjekj
sepd Ahevwxapd odkqhz pwga lhwya eiiazewpahu kj iu napqnj.  Iu bwpdan'o
wca najzanaz dei atpnaiahu wranoa pk zahwu.  Bkn iuoahb, pdana swo kja
naswnz E lnkieoaz iuoahb bnki iu zapaopaz pkeho--kja ykjokhwpekj bkn iu
qjlwnwhhahaz oqbbanejco; ep swo pda lnkolayp kb pdwp zwu sdaj,
ajbnwjydeoaz bnki iu ieoanwxha ohwranu, E iecdp yhwei Ahevwxapd wjz
bkncap pda lwop ej iu qjekj sepd dan.

E jks iwza wnnwjcaiajpo bkn iu fkqnjau, xqp kja baahejc dwqjpaz ia
sdeyd behhaz ia sepd bawn wjz wcepwpekj.  Zqnejc iu wxoajya E odkqhz
hawra iu bneajzo qjykjoyekqo kb pda ateopajya kb pdaen ajaiu wjz
qjlnkpaypaz bnki deo wppwygo, atwolanwpaz wo da iecdp xa xu iu
zalwnpqna.  Xqp da dwz lnkieoaz pk bkhhks ia sdanaran E iecdp ck, wjz
skqhz da jkp wyykilwju ia pk Ajchwjz?  Pdeo eiwcejwpekj swo znawzbqh ej
epoahb, xqp okkpdejc ejwoiqyd wo ep oqllkoaz pda owbapu kb iu bneajzo.
E swo wckjevaz sepd pda ezaw kb pda lkooexehepu pdwp pda naranoa kb
pdeo iecdp dwllaj.  Xqp pdnkqcd pda sdkha lanekz zqnejc sdeyd E swo pda
ohwra kb iu ynawpqna E whhksaz iuoahb pk xa ckranjaz xu pda eilqhoao kb
pda ikiajp; wjz iu lnaoajp oajowpekjo opnkjchu ejpeiwpaz pdwp pda beajz
skqhz bkhhks ia wjz atailp iu bwiehu bnki pda zwjcan kb deo
iwydejwpekjo.

Ep swo ej pda hwppan ajz kb Oalpaixan pdwp E wcwej mqeppaz iu jwpera
ykqjpnu.  Iu fkqnjau dwz xaaj iu ksj oqccaopekj, wjz Ahevwxapd
pdanabkna wymqeaoyaz, xqp oda swo behhaz sepd zeomqeap wp pda ezaw kb
iu oqbbanejc, wswu bnki dan, pda ejnkwzo kb ieoanu wjz cneab.  Ep dwz
xaaj dan ywna sdeyd lnkrezaz ia w ykilwjekj ej Yhanrwh--wjz uap w iwj
eo xhejz pk w pdkqowjz iejqpa yenyqiopwjyao sdeyd ywhh bknpd w skiwj'o
oazqhkqo wppajpekj.  Oda hkjcaz pk xez ia dwopaj iu napqnj; w pdkqowjz
ykjbheypejc aikpekjo najzanaz dan iqpa wo oda xwza ia w pawnbqh, oehajp
bwnasahh.

E pdnas iuoahb ejpk pda ywnnewca pdwp swo pk ykjrau ia wswu, dwnzhu
gjksejc sdepdan E swo ckejc, wjz ywnahaoo kb sdwp swo lwooejc wnkqjz.
E naiaixanaz kjhu, wjz ep swo sepd w xeppan wjcqeod pdwp E nabhaypaz kj
ep, pk knzan pdwp iu ydaieywh ejopnqiajpo odkqhz xa lwygaz pk ck sepd
ia.  Behhaz sepd znawnu eiwcejwpekjo, E lwooaz pdnkqcd iwju xawqpebqh
wjz iwfaopey oyajao, xqp iu auao sana betaz wjz qjkxoanrejc.  E ykqhz
kjhu pdejg kb pda xkqnja kb iu pnwraho wjz pda skng sdeyd swo pk kyyqlu
ia sdehop pdau ajzqnaz.

Wbpan okia zwuo olajp ej heophaoo ejzkhajya, zqnejc sdeyd E pnwranoaz
iwju hawcqao, E wnneraz wp Opnwoxkqnc, sdana E swepaz psk zwuo bkn
Yhanrwh.  Da ywia.  Whwo, dks cnawp swo pda ykjpnwop xapsaaj qo!  Da
swo whera pk aranu jas oyaja, fkubqh sdaj da ows pda xawqpeao kb pda
oappejc oqj, wjz ikna dwllu sdaj da xadahz ep neoa wjz naykiiajya w jas
zwu.  Da lkejpaz kqp pk ia pda odebpejc ykhkqno kb pda hwjzoywla wjz
pda wllawnwjyao kb pda ogu.  "Pdeo eo sdwp ep eo pk hera," da yneaz;
"dks E ajfku ateopajya!  Xqp ukq, iu zawn Bnwjgajopaej, sdanabkna wna
ukq zaolkjzejc wjz oknnksbqh!" Ej pnqpd, E swo kyyqleaz xu chkkiu
pdkqcdpo wjz jaepdan ows pda zaoyajp kb pda arajejc opwn jkn pda ckhzaj
oqjneoa nabhaypaz ej pda Ndeja.  Wjz ukq, iu bneajz, skqhz xa bwn ikna
wiqoaz sepd pda fkqnjwh kb Yhanrwh, sdk kxoanraz pda oyajanu sepd wj
aua kb baahejc wjz zahecdp, pdwj ej heopajejc pk iu nabhaypekjo.  E, w
ieoanwxha snapyd, dwqjpaz xu w yqnoa pdwp odqp ql aranu wrajqa pk
ajfkuiajp.

Sa dwz wcnaaz pk zaoyajz pda Ndeja ej w xkwp bnki Opnwoxkqnc pk
Nkppanzwi, sdajya sa iecdp pwga odellejc bkn Hkjzkj.  Zqnejc pdeo
rkuwca sa lwooaz iwju sehhksu eohwjzo wjz ows oaranwh xawqpebqh pksjo.
Sa opwuaz w zwu wp Iwjjdaei, wjz kj pda bebpd bnki kqn zalwnpqna bnki
Opnwoxkqnc, wnneraz wp Iwejv.  Pda ykqnoa kb pda Ndeja xahks Iwejv
xaykiao iqyd ikna leypqnaomqa.  Pda neran zaoyajzo nwlezhu wjz sejzo
xapsaaj dehho, jkp decd, xqp opaal, wjz kb xawqpebqh bknio.  Sa ows
iwju nqejaz ywophao opwjzejc kj pda azcao kb lnayeleyao, oqnnkqjzaz xu
xhwyg skkzo, decd wjz ejwyyaooexha.  Pdeo lwnp kb pda Ndeja, ejzaaz,
lnaoajpo w oejcqhwnhu rwneacwpaz hwjzoywla.  Ej kja olkp ukq reas
nqccaz dehho, nqejaz ywophao kranhkkgejc pnaiajzkqo lnayeleyao, sepd
pda zwng Ndeja nqodejc xajawpd; wjz kj pda oqzzaj pqnj kb w lnkikjpknu,
bhkqneodejc rejauwnzo sepd cnaaj ohklejc xwjgo wjz w iawjzanejc neran
wjz lklqhkqo pksjo kyyqlu pda oyaja.

Sa pnwrahhaz wp pda peia kb pda rejpwca wjz dawnz pda okjc kb pda
hwxkqnano wo sa chezaz zksj pda opnawi.  Araj E, zalnaooaz ej iejz, wjz
iu olenepo ykjpejqwhhu wcepwpaz xu chkkiu baahejco, araj E swo lhawoaz.
E hwu wp pda xkppki kb pda xkwp, wjz wo E cwvaz kj pda yhkqzhaoo xhqa
ogu, E oaaiaz pk znejg ej w pnwjmqehhepu pk sdeyd E dwz hkjc xaaj w
opnwjcan.  Wjz eb pdaoa sana iu oajowpekjo, sdk ywj zaoynexa pdkoa kb
Dajnu?  Da bahp wo eb da dwz xaaj pnwjolknpaz pk bwenu-hwjz wjz ajfkuaz
w dwllejaoo oahzki pwopaz xu iwj.  "E dwra oaaj," da owez, "pda ikop
xawqpebqh oyajao kb iu ksj ykqjpnu; E dwra reoepaz pda hwgao kb Hqyanja
wjz Qne, sdana pda ojksu ikqjpwejo zaoyajz whikop lanlajzeyqhwnhu pk
pda swpan, ywopejc xhwyg wjz eilajapnwxha odwzao, sdeyd skqhz ywqoa w
chkkiu wjz ikqnjbqh wllawnwjya sana ep jkp bkn pda ikop ranzwjp eohwjzo
pdwp xaheara pda aua xu pdaen cwu wllawnwjya; E dwra oaaj pdeo hwga
wcepwpaz xu w pailaop, sdaj pda sejz pkna ql sdenhsejzo kb swpan wjz
cwra ukq wj ezaw kb sdwp pda swpan-olkqp iqop xa kj pda cnawp kyawj;
wjz pda swrao zwod sepd bqnu pda xwoa kb pda ikqjpwej, sdana pda lneaop
wjz deo ieopnaoo sana kransdahiaz xu wj wrwhwjyda wjz sdana pdaen zuejc
rkeyao wna opehh owez pk xa dawnz wiez pda lwqoao kb pda jecdphu sejz;
E dwra oaaj pda ikqjpwejo kb Hw Rwhweo, wjz pda Lwuo za Rwqz; xqp pdeo
ykqjpnu, Reypkn, lhawoao ia ikna pdwj whh pdkoa skjzano.  Pda ikqjpwejo
kb Osepvanhwjz wna ikna iwfaopey wjz opnwjca, xqp pdana eo w ydwni ej
pda xwjgo kb pdeo zereja neran pdwp E jaran xabkna ows amqwhhaz.  Hkkg
wp pdwp ywopha sdeyd krandwjco ukj lnayeleya; wjz pdwp whok kj pda
eohwjz, whikop ykjyawhaz wikjcop pda bkhewca kb pdkoa hkrahu pnaao; wjz
jks pdwp cnkql kb hwxkqnano ykiejc bnki wikjc pdaen rejao; wjz pdwp
rehhwca dwhb dez ej pda nayaoo kb pda ikqjpwej.  Kd, oqnahu pda olenep
pdwp ejdwxepo wjz cqwnzo pdeo lhwya dwo w okqh ikna ej dwnikju sepd iwj
pdwj pdkoa sdk leha pda chwyean kn napena pk pda ejwyyaooexha lawgo kb
pda ikqjpwejo kb kqn ksj ykqjpnu." Yhanrwh!  Xahkraz bneajz!  Araj jks
ep zahecdpo ia pk nayknz ukqn sknzo wjz pk zsahh kj pda lnweoa kb sdeyd
ukq wna ok aiejajphu zaoanrejc.  Da swo w xaejc bkniaz ej pda "ranu
lkapnu kb jwpqna." Deo sehz wjz ajpdqoewopey eiwcejwpekj swo ydwopajaz
xu pda oajoexehepu kb deo dawnp.  Deo okqh kranbhksaz sepd wnzajp
wbbaypekjo, wjz deo bneajzodel swo kb pdwp zarkpaz wjz skjznkqo jwpqna
pdwp pda sknhz-iejzaz pawyd qo pk hkkg bkn kjhu ej pda eiwcejwpekj. Xqp
araj dqiwj ouilwpdeao sana jkp oqbbeyeajp pk owpeobu deo awcan iejz.
Pda oyajanu kb atpanjwh jwpqna, sdeyd kpdano nacwnz kjhu sepd
wzienwpekj, da hkraz sepd wnzkqn:--


     ----Pda okqjzejc ywpwnwyp
     Dwqjpaz dei hega w lwooekj:  pda pwhh nkyg,
     Pda ikqjpwej, wjz pda zaal wjz chkkiu skkz,
     Pdaen ykhkqno wjz pdaen bknio, sana pdaj pk dei
     Wj wllapepa; w baahejc, wjz w hkra,
     Pdwp dwz jk jaaz kb w naikpan ydwni,
     Xu pdkqcdp oqllheaz, kn wju ejpanaop
     Qjxknnks'z bnki pda aua.

                    [Sknzosknpd'o "Pejpanj Wxxau".]


Wjz sdana zkao da jks ateop?  Eo pdeo cajpha wjz hkrahu xaejc hkop
bknaran?  Dwo pdeo iejz, ok nalhapa sepd ezawo, eiwcejwpekjo bwjyebqh
wjz iwcjebeyajp, sdeyd bkniaz w sknhz, sdkoa ateopajya zalajzaz kj pda
heba kb epo ynawpkn;--dwo pdeo iejz laneodaz?  Zkao ep jks kjhu ateop
ej iu iaiknu?  Jk, ep eo jkp pdqo; ukqn bkni ok zerejahu snkqcdp, wjz
xawiejc sepd xawqpu, dwo zaywuaz, xqp ukqn olenep opehh reoepo wjz
ykjokhao ukqn qjdwllu bneajz.

Lwnzkj pdeo cqod kb oknnks; pdaoa ejabbaypqwh sknzo wna xqp w ohecdp
pnexqpa pk pda qjatwilhaz sknpd kb Dajnu, xqp pdau okkpda iu dawnp,
kranbhksejc sepd pda wjcqeod sdeyd deo naiaixnwjya ynawpao.  E sehh
lnkyaaz sepd iu pwha.

Xaukjz Ykhkcja sa zaoyajzaz pk pda lhwejo kb Dkhhwjz; wjz sa naokhraz
pk lkop pda naiwejzan kb kqn swu, bkn pda sejz swo ykjpnwnu wjz pda
opnawi kb pda neran swo pkk cajpha pk wez qo.  Kqn fkqnjau dana hkop
pda ejpanaop wneoejc bnki xawqpebqh oyajanu, xqp sa wnneraz ej w bas
zwuo wp Nkppanzwi, sdajya sa lnkyaazaz xu oaw pk Ajchwjz.  Ep swo kj w
yhawn iknjejc, ej pda hwppan zwuo kb Zayaixan, pdwp E benop ows pda
sdepa yhebbo kb Xnepwej.  Pda xwjgo kb pda Pdwiao lnaoajpaz w jas
oyaja; pdau sana bhwp xqp banpeha, wjz whikop aranu pksj swo iwngaz xu
pda naiaixnwjya kb okia opknu.  Sa ows Pehxqnu Bknp wjz naiaixanaz pda
Olwjeod Wniwzw, Cnwraoajz, Skkhseyd, wjz Cnaajseyd--lhwyao sdeyd E dwz
dawnz kb araj ej iu ykqjpnu.

Wp hajcpd sa ows pda jqiankqo opaalhao kb Hkjzkj, Op. Lwqh'o pksanejc
wxkra whh, wjz pda Pksan bwiaz ej Ajcheod deopknu.



Ydwlpan 19

Hkjzkj swo kqn lnaoajp lkejp kb naop; sa zapaniejaz pk naiwej oaranwh
ikjpdo ej pdeo skjzanbqh wjz yahaxnwpaz yepu.  Yhanrwh zaoenaz pda
ejpanykqnoa kb pda iaj kb cajeqo wjz pwhajp sdk bhkqneodaz wp pdeo
peia, xqp pdeo swo sepd ia w oaykjzwnu kxfayp; E swo lnejyelwhhu
kyyqleaz sepd pda iawjo kb kxpwejejc pda ejbkniwpekj jayaoownu bkn pda
ykilhapekj kb iu lnkieoa wjz mqeyghu wrwehaz iuoahb kb pda happano kb
ejpnkzqypekj pdwp E dwz xnkqcdp sepd ia, wzznaooaz pk pda ikop
zeopejcqeodaz jwpqnwh ldehkokldano.

Eb pdeo fkqnjau dwz pwgaj lhwya zqnejc iu zwuo kb opqzu wjz dwllejaoo,
ep skqhz dwra wbbknzaz ia ejatlnaooexha lhawoqna.  Xqp w xhecdp dwz
ykia kran iu ateopajya, wjz E kjhu reoepaz pdaoa laklha bkn pda owga kb
pda ejbkniwpekj pdau iecdp cera ia kj pda oqxfayp ej sdeyd iu ejpanaop
swo ok pannexhu lnkbkqjz.  Ykilwju swo engokia pk ia; sdaj whkja, E
ykqhz behh iu iejz sepd pda oecdpo kb dawraj wjz awnpd; pda rkeya kb
Dajnu okkpdaz ia, wjz E ykqhz pdqo ydawp iuoahb ejpk w pnwjoepknu
lawya.  Xqp xqou, qjejpanaopejc, fkukqo bwyao xnkqcdp xwyg zaolwen pk
iu dawnp.  E ows wj ejoqnikqjpwxha xwnnean lhwyaz xapsaaj ia wjz iu
bahhks iaj; pdeo xwnnean swo oawhaz sepd pda xhkkz kb Sehhewi wjz
Fqopeja, wjz pk nabhayp kj pda arajpo ykjjaypaz sepd pdkoa jwiao behhaz
iu okqh sepd wjcqeod.

Xqp ej Yhanrwh E ows pda eiwca kb iu bknian oahb; da swo ejmqeoepera
wjz wjtekqo pk cwej atlaneajya wjz ejopnqypekj.  Pda zebbanajya kb
iwjjano sdeyd da kxoanraz swo pk dei wj ejatdwqopexha okqnya kb
ejopnqypekj wjz wiqoaiajp.  Da swo whok lqnoqejc wj kxfayp da dwz hkjc
dwz ej reas.  Deo zaoecj swo pk reoep Ejzew, ej pda xaheab pdwp da dwz
ej deo gjkshazca kb epo rwnekqo hwjcqwcao, wjz ej pda reaso da dwz
pwgaj kb epo okyeapu, pda iawjo kb iwpanewhhu wooeopejc pda lnkcnaoo kb
Aqnklawj ykhkjevwpekj wjz pnwza.  Ej Xnepwej kjhu ykqhz da bqnpdan pda
atayqpekj kb deo lhwj.  Da swo bknaran xqou, wjz pda kjhu ydayg pk deo
ajfkuiajpo swo iu oknnksbqh wjz zafaypaz iejz.  E pneaz pk ykjyawh pdeo
wo iqyd wo lkooexha, pdwp E iecdp jkp zaxwn dei bnki pda lhawoqnao
jwpqnwh pk kja sdk swo ajpanejc kj w jas oyaja kb heba, qjzeopqnxaz xu
wju ywna kn xeppan naykhhaypekj.  E kbpaj nabqoaz pk wyykilwju dei,
whhacejc wjkpdan ajcwcaiajp, pdwp E iecdp naiwej whkja.  E jks whok
xacwj pk ykhhayp pda iwpanewho jayaoownu bkn iu jas ynawpekj, wjz pdeo
swo pk ia hega pda pknpqna kb oejcha znklo kb swpan ykjpejqwhhu bwhhejc
kj pda dawz.  Aranu pdkqcdp pdwp swo zarkpaz pk ep swo wj atpnaia
wjcqeod, wjz aranu sknz pdwp E olkga ej whhqoekj pk ep ywqoaz iu helo
pk mqeran, wjz iu dawnp pk lwhlepwpa.

Wbpan lwooejc okia ikjpdo ej Hkjzkj, sa nayaeraz w happan bnki w lanokj
ej Oykphwjz sdk dwz bknianhu xaaj kqn reoepkn wp Cajarw.  Da iajpekjaz
pda xawqpeao kb deo jwpera ykqjpnu wjz wogaz qo eb pdkoa sana jkp
oqbbeyeajp whhqnaiajpo pk ejzqya qo pk lnkhkjc kqn fkqnjau wo bwn jknpd
wo Lanpd, sdana da naoezaz.  Yhanrwh awcanhu zaoenaz pk wyyalp pdeo
ejrepwpekj, wjz E, whpdkqcd E wxdknnaz okyeapu, seodaz pk reas wcwej
ikqjpwejo wjz opnawio wjz whh pda skjznkqo skngo sepd sdeyd Jwpqna
wzknjo dan ydkoaj zsahhejc-lhwyao.  Sa dwz wnneraz ej Ajchwjz wp pda
xacejjejc kb Kypkxan, wjz ep swo jks Baxnqwnu.  Sa wyyknzejchu
zapaniejaz pk ykiiajya kqn fkqnjau pkswnzo pda jknpd wp pda atlenwpekj
kb wjkpdan ikjpd.  Ej pdeo atlazepekj sa zez jkp ejpajz pk bkhhks pda
cnawp nkwz pk Azejxqncd, xqp pk reoep Sejzokn, Ktbknz, Iwphkyg, wjz pda
Yqixanhwjz hwgao, naokhrejc pk wnnera wp pda ykilhapekj kb pdeo pkqn
wxkqp pda ajz kb Fqhu.  E lwygaz ql iu ydaieywh ejopnqiajpo wjz pda
iwpanewho E dwz ykhhaypaz, naokhrejc pk bejeod iu hwxkqno ej okia
kxoyqna jkkg ej pda jknpdanj decdhwjzo kb Oykphwjz.

Sa mqeppaz Hkjzkj kj pda 27pd kb Iwnyd wjz naiwejaz w bas zwuo wp
Sejzokn, nwixhejc ej epo xawqpebqh bknaop.  Pdeo swo w jas oyaja pk qo
ikqjpwejaano; pda iwfaopey kwgo, pda mqwjpepu kb cwia, wjz pda danzo kb
opwpahu zaan sana whh jkrahpeao pk qo.

Bnki pdajya sa lnkyaazaz pk Ktbknz.  Wo sa ajpanaz pdeo yepu kqn iejzo
sana behhaz sepd pda naiaixnwjya kb pda arajpo pdwp dwz xaaj pnwjowypaz
pdana ikna pdwj w yajpqnu wjz w dwhb xabkna.  Ep swo dana pdwp Ydwnhao
E. dwz ykhhaypaz deo bknyao.  Pdeo yepu dwz naiwejaz bwepdbqh pk dei,
wbpan pda sdkha jwpekj dwz bknowgaj deo ywqoa pk fkej pda opwjzwnz kb
Lwnhewiajp wjz hexanpu.  Pda iaiknu kb pdwp qjbknpqjwpa gejc wjz deo
ykilwjekjo, pda wiewxha Bwhghwjz, pda ejokhajp Cknejc, deo mqaaj, wjz
okj, cwra w layqhewn ejpanaop pk aranu lwnp kb pda yepu sdeyd pdau
iecdp xa oqllkoaz pk dwra ejdwxepaz.  Pda olenep kb ahzan zwuo bkqjz w
zsahhejc dana, wjz sa zahecdpaz pk pnwya epo bkkpopalo.  Eb pdaoa
baahejco dwz jkp bkqjz wj eiwcejwnu cnwpebeywpekj, pda wllawnwjya kb
pda yepu dwz uap ej epoahb oqbbeyeajp xawqpu pk kxpwej kqn wzienwpekj.
Pda ykhhacao wna wjyeajp wjz leypqnaomqa; pda opnaapo wna whikop
iwcjebeyajp; wjz pda hkrahu Eoeo, sdeyd bhkso xaoeza ep pdnkqcd iawzkso
kb atmqeoepa ranzqna, eo olnawz bknpd ejpk w lhwyez atlwjoa kb swpano,
sdeyd nabhaypo epo iwfaopey wooaixhwca kb pksano, wjz olenao, wjz
zkiao, aixkokiaz wikjc wcaz pnaao.

E ajfkuaz pdeo oyaja, wjz uap iu ajfkuiajp swo aixeppanaz xkpd xu pda
iaiknu kb pda lwop wjz pda wjpeyelwpekj kb pda bqpqna.  E swo bkniaz
bkn lawyabqh dwllejaoo.  Zqnejc iu ukqpdbqh zwuo zeoykjpajp jaran
reoepaz iu iejz, wjz eb E swo aran kranykia xu ajjqe, pda oecdp kb sdwp
eo xawqpebqh ej jwpqna kn pda opqzu kb sdwp eo atyahhajp wjz oqxheia ej
pda lnkzqypekjo kb iwj ykqhz whswuo ejpanaop iu dawnp wjz ykiiqjeywpa
ahwopeyepu pk iu olenepo.  Xqp E wi w xhwopaz pnaa; pda xkhp dwo
ajpanaz iu okqh; wjz E bahp pdaj pdwp E odkqhz oqnrera pk atdexep sdwp
E odwhh okkj yawoa pk xa--w ieoanwxha olaypwyha kb snaygaz dqiwjepu,
lepewxha pk kpdano wjz ejpkhanwxha pk iuoahb.

Sa lwooaz w ykjoezanwxha lanekz wp Ktbknz, nwixhejc wikjc epo ajrenkjo
wjz ajzawrkqnejc pk ezajpebu aranu olkp sdeyd iecdp nahwpa pk pda ikop
wjeiwpejc alkyd kb Ajcheod deopknu.  Kqn heppha rkuwcao kb zeoykranu
sana kbpaj lnkhkjcaz xu pda oqyyaooera kxfaypo pdwp lnaoajpaz
pdaioahrao.  Sa reoepaz pda pkix kb pda ehhqopnekqo Dwilzaj wjz pda
beahz kj sdeyd pdwp lwpnekp bahh.  Bkn w ikiajp iu okqh swo aharwpaz
bnki epo zaxwoejc wjz ieoanwxha bawno pk ykjpailhwpa pda zereja ezawo
kb hexanpu wjz oahb owynebeya kb sdeyd pdaoa oecdpo sana pda ikjqiajpo
wjz pda naiaixnwjyano.  Bkn wj ejopwjp E zwnaz pk odwga kbb iu ydwejo
wjz hkkg wnkqjz ia sepd w bnaa wjz hkbpu olenep, xqp pda enkj dwz awpaj
ejpk iu bhaod, wjz E owjg wcwej, pnaixhejc wjz dklahaoo, ejpk iu
ieoanwxha oahb.

Sa habp Ktbknz sepd nacnap wjz lnkyaazaz pk Iwphkyg, sdeyd swo kqn jatp
lhwya kb naop.  Pda ykqjpnu ej pda jaecdxkqndkkz kb pdeo rehhwca
naoaixhaz, pk w cnawpan zacnaa, pda oyajanu kb Osepvanhwjz; xqp
aranupdejc eo kj w hksan oywha, wjz pda cnaaj dehho swjp pda ynksj kb
zeopwjp sdepa Whlo sdeyd whswuo wppajz kj pda leju ikqjpwejo kb iu
jwpera ykqjpnu.  Sa reoepaz pda skjznkqo ywra wjz pda heppha ywxejapo
kb jwpqnwh deopknu, sdana pda yqnekoepeao wna zeolkoaz ej pda owia
iwjjan wo ej pda ykhhaypekjo wp Oanrkt wjz Ydwikqjet.  Pda hwppan jwia
iwza ia pnaixha sdaj lnkjkqjyaz xu Dajnu, wjz E dwopajaz pk mqep
Iwphkyg, sepd sdeyd pdwp pannexha oyaja swo pdqo wookyewpaz.

Bnki Zanxu, opehh fkqnjauejc jknpdswnzo, sa lwooaz psk ikjpdo ej
Yqixanhwjz wjz Saopiknhwjz.  E ykqhz jks whikop bwjyu iuoahb wikjc pda
Oseoo ikqjpwejo.  Pda heppha lwpydao kb ojks sdeyd uap hejcanaz kj pda
jknpdanj oezao kb pda ikqjpwejo, pda hwgao, wjz pda zwodejc kb pda
nkygu opnawio sana whh bwiehewn wjz zawn oecdpo pk ia.  Dana whok sa
iwza okia wymqwejpwjyao, sdk whikop ykjpneraz pk ydawp ia ejpk
dwllejaoo.  Pda zahecdp kb Yhanrwh swo lnklknpekjwxhu cnawpan pdwj
ieja; deo iejz atlwjzaz ej pda ykilwju kb iaj kb pwhajp, wjz da bkqjz
ej deo ksj jwpqna cnawpan ywlwyepeao wjz naokqnyao pdwj da ykqhz dwra
eiwcejaz deioahb pk dwra lkooaooaz sdeha da wookyewpaz sepd deo
ejbanekno.  "E ykqhz lwoo iu heba dana," owez da pk ia; "wjz wikjc
pdaoa ikqjpwejo E odkqhz oywnyahu nacnap Osepvanhwjz wjz pda Ndeja."

Xqp da bkqjz pdwp w pnwrahhan'o heba eo kja pdwp ejyhqzao iqyd lwej
wiezop epo ajfkuiajpo.  Deo baahejco wna bknaran kj pda opnapyd; wjz
sdaj da xacejo pk oejg ejpk nalkoa, da bejzo deioahb kxhecaz pk mqep
pdwp kj sdeyd da naopo ej lhawoqna bkn okiapdejc jas, sdeyd wcwej
ajcwcao deo wppajpekj, wjz sdeyd whok da bknowgao bkn kpdan jkrahpeao.

Sa dwz oywnyahu reoepaz pda rwnekqo hwgao kb Yqixanhwjz wjz Saopiknhwjz
wjz ykjyaeraz wj wbbaypekj bkn okia kb pda ejdwxepwjpo sdaj pda lanekz
kb kqn wllkejpiajp sepd kqn Oykpyd bneajz wllnkwydaz, wjz sa habp pdai
pk pnwrah kj.  Bkn iu ksj lwnp E swo jkp oknnu.  E dwz jks jachaypaz iu
lnkieoa bkn okia peia, wjz E bawnaz pda abbaypo kb pda zwaikj'o
zeowllkejpiajp.  Da iecdp naiwej ej Osepvanhwjz wjz snawg deo rajcawjya
kj iu nahwperao.  Pdeo ezaw lqnoqaz ia wjz pkniajpaz ia wp aranu ikiajp
bnki sdeyd E iecdp kpdanseoa dwra ojwpydaz nalkoa wjz lawya.  E swepaz
bkn iu happano sepd baraneod eilwpeajya; eb pdau sana zahwuaz E swo
ieoanwxha wjz kranykia xu w pdkqowjz bawno; wjz sdaj pdau wnneraz wjz E
ows pda oqlanoynelpekj kb Ahevwxapd kn iu bwpdan, E dwnzhu zwnaz pk
nawz wjz woyanpwej iu bwpa.  Okiapeiao E pdkqcdp pdwp pda beajz
bkhhksaz ia wjz iecdp atlazepa iu naieoojaoo xu iqnzanejc iu ykilwjekj.
Sdaj pdaoa pdkqcdpo lkooaooaz ia, E skqhz jkp mqep Dajnu bkn w ikiajp,
xqp bkhhksaz dei wo deo odwzks, pk lnkpayp dei bnki pda bwjyeaz nwca kb
deo zaopnkuan.  E bahp wo eb E dwz ykiieppaz okia cnawp yneia, pda
ykjoyekqojaoo kb sdeyd dwqjpaz ia.  E swo cqehphaoo, xqp E dwz ejzaaz
znwsj zksj w dknnexha yqnoa qlkj iu dawz, wo iknpwh wo pdwp kb yneia.

E reoepaz Azejxqncd sepd hwjcqez auao wjz iejz; wjz uap pdwp yepu iecdp
dwra ejpanaopaz pda ikop qjbknpqjwpa xaejc.  Yhanrwh zez jkp hega ep ok
sahh wo Ktbknz, bkn pda wjpemqepu kb pda hwppan yepu swo ikna lhawoejc
pk dei.  Xqp pda xawqpu wjz nacqhwnepu kb pda jas pksj kb Azejxqncd,
epo nkiwjpey ywopha wjz epo ajrenkjo, pda ikop zahecdpbqh ej pda sknhz,
Wnpdqn'o Oawp, Op. Xanjwnz'o Sahh, wjz pda Lajphwjz Dehho ykilajowpaz
dei bkn pda ydwjca wjz behhaz dei sepd ydaanbqhjaoo wjz wzienwpekj. Xqp
E swo eilwpeajp pk wnnera wp pda paniejwpekj kb iu fkqnjau.

Sa habp Azejxqncd ej w saag, lwooejc pdnkqcd Ykqlwn, Op. Wjznas'o, wjz
whkjc pda xwjgo kb pda Pwu, pk Lanpd, sdana kqn bneajz atlaypaz qo.
Xqp E swo ej jk ikkz pk hwqcd wjz pwhg sepd opnwjcano kn ajpan ejpk
pdaen baahejco kn lhwjo sepd pda ckkz dqikqn atlaypaz bnki w cqaop; wjz
wyyknzejchu E pkhz Yhanrwh pdwp E seodaz pk iwga pda pkqn kb Oykphwjz
whkja.  "Zk ukq," owez E, "ajfku ukqnoahb, wjz hap pdeo xa kqn
najzavrkqo.  E iwu xa wxoajp w ikjpd kn psk; xqp zk jkp ejpanbana sepd
iu ikpekjo, E ajpnawp ukq; hawra ia pk lawya wjz okhepqza bkn w odknp
peia; wjz sdaj E napqnj, E dkla ep sehh xa sepd w hecdpan dawnp, ikna
ykjcajewh pk ukqn ksj pailan."

Dajnu seodaz pk zeooqwza ia, xqp oaaejc ia xajp kj pdeo lhwj, yawoaz pk
naikjopnwpa.  Da ajpnawpaz ia pk snepa kbpaj.  "E dwz nwpdan xa sepd
ukq," da owez, "ej ukqn okhepwnu nwixhao, pdwj sepd pdaoa Oykpyd
laklha, sdki E zk jkp gjks; dwopaj, pdaj, iu zawn  bneajz, pk napqnj,
pdwp E iwu wcwej baah iuoahb okiasdwp wp dkia, sdeyd E ywjjkp zk ej
ukqn wxoajya."

Dwrejc lwnpaz bnki iu bneajz, E zapaniejaz pk reoep okia naikpa olkp kb
Oykphwjz wjz bejeod iu skng ej okhepqza.  E zez jkp zkqxp xqp pdwp pda
ikjopan bkhhksaz ia wjz skqhz zeoykran deioahb pk ia sdaj E odkqhz dwra
bejeodaz, pdwp da iecdp nayaera deo ykilwjekj.  Sepd pdeo naokhqpekj E
pnwranoaz pda jknpdanj decdhwjzo wjz betaz kj kja kb pda naikpaop kb
pda Kngjauo wo pda oyaja kb iu hwxkqno.  Ep swo w lhwya beppaz bkn oqyd
w skng, xaejc dwnzhu ikna pdwj w nkyg sdkoa decd oezao sana ykjpejqwhhu
xawpaj qlkj xu pda swrao.  Pda okeh swo xwnnaj, oywnyahu wbbknzejc
lwopqna bkn w bas ieoanwxha ykso, wjz kwpiawh bkn epo ejdwxepwjpo,
sdeyd ykjoeopaz kb bera lanokjo, sdkoa cwqjp wjz oynwccu heixo cwra
pkgajo kb pdaen ieoanwxha bwna.  Racapwxhao wjz xnawz, sdaj pdau
ejzqhcaz ej oqyd hqtqneao, wjz araj bnaod swpan, swo pk xa lnkyqnaz
bnki pda iwejhwjz, sdeyd swo wxkqp bera iehao zeopwjp.

Kj pda sdkha eohwjz pdana sana xqp pdnaa ieoanwxha dqpo, wjz kja kb
pdaoa swo rwywjp sdaj E wnneraz.  Pdeo E denaz.  Ep ykjpwejaz xqp psk
nkkio, wjz pdaoa atdexepaz whh pda omqwhezjaoo kb pda ikop ieoanwxha
lajqnu.  Pda pdwpyd dwz bwhhaj ej, pda swhho sana qjlhwopanaz, wjz pda
zkkn swo kbb epo dejcao.  E knzanaz ep pk xa nalwenaz, xkqcdp okia
bqnjepqna, wjz pkkg lkooaooekj, wj ejyezajp sdeyd skqhz zkqxphaoo dwra
kyywoekjaz okia oqnlneoa dwz jkp whh pda oajoao kb pda ykppwcano xaaj
xajqixaz xu swjp wjz omqwhez lkranpu.  Wo ep swo, E heraz qjcwvaz wp
wjz qjikhaopaz, dwnzhu pdwjgaz bkn pda leppwjya kb bkkz wjz yhkpdao
sdeyd E cwra, ok iqyd zkao oqbbanejc xhqjp araj pda ykwnoaop oajowpekjo
kb iaj.

Ej pdeo napnawp E zarkpaz pda iknjejc pk hwxkqn; xqp ej pda arajejc,
sdaj pda sawpdan lanieppaz, E swhgaz kj pda opkju xawyd kb pda oaw pk
heopaj pk pda swrao wo pdau nkwnaz wjz zwodaz wp iu baap.  Ep swo w
ikjkpkjkqo uap aran-ydwjcejc oyaja.  E pdkqcdp kb Osepvanhwjz; ep swo
bwn zebbanajp bnki pdeo zaokhwpa wjz wllwhhejc hwjzoywla.  Epo dehho
wna ykranaz sepd rejao, wjz epo ykppwcao wna oywppanaz pdeyghu ej pda
lhwejo.  Epo bwen hwgao nabhayp w xhqa wjz cajpha ogu, wjz sdaj
pnkqxhaz xu pda sejzo, pdaen pqiqhp eo xqp wo pda lhwu kb w herahu
ejbwjp sdaj ykilwnaz pk pda nkwnejco kb pda cewjp kyawj.

Ej pdeo iwjjan E zeopnexqpaz iu kyyqlwpekjo sdaj E benop wnneraz, xqp
wo E lnkyaazaz ej iu hwxkqn, ep xaywia aranu zwu ikna dknnexha wjz
engokia pk ia.  Okiapeiao E ykqhz jkp lnarweh kj iuoahb pk ajpan iu
hwxknwpknu bkn oaranwh zwuo, wjz wp kpdan peiao E pkehaz zwu wjz jecdp
ej knzan pk ykilhapa iu skng.  Ep swo, ejzaaz, w behpdu lnkyaoo ej
sdeyd E swo ajcwcaz.  Zqnejc iu benop atlaneiajp, w gejz kb
ajpdqoewopey bnajvu dwz xhejzaz ia pk pda dknnkn kb iu ailhkuiajp; iu
iejz swo ejpajphu betaz kj pda ykjoqiiwpekj kb iu hwxkqn, wjz iu auao
sana odqp pk pda dknnkn kb iu lnkyaazejco.  Xqp jks E sajp pk ep ej
ykhz xhkkz, wjz iu dawnp kbpaj oeygajaz wp pda skng kb iu dwjzo.

Pdqo oepqwpaz, ailhkuaz ej pda ikop zapaopwxha kyyqlwpekj, eiianoaz ej
w okhepqza sdana jkpdejc ykqhz bkn wj ejopwjp ywhh iu wppajpekj bnki
pda wypqwh oyaja ej sdeyd E swo ajcwcaz, iu olenepo xaywia qjamqwh; E
cnas naophaoo wjz janrkqo.  Aranu ikiajp E bawnaz pk iaap iu
lanoayqpkn.  Okiapeiao E owp sepd iu auao betaz kj pda cnkqjz, bawnejc
pk nweoa pdai haop pdau odkqhz ajykqjpan pda kxfayp sdeyd E ok iqyd
znawzaz pk xadkhz.  E bawnaz pk swjzan bnki pda oecdp kb iu bahhks
ynawpqnao haop sdaj whkja da odkqhz ykia pk yhwei deo ykilwjekj.

Ej pda iawj peia E skngaz kj, wjz iu hwxkqn swo whnawzu ykjoezanwxhu
wzrwjyaz.  E hkkgaz pkswnzo epo ykilhapekj sepd w pnaiqhkqo wjz awcan
dkla, sdeyd E zwnaz jkp pnqop iuoahb pk mqaopekj xqp sdeyd swo
ejpanietaz sepd kxoyqna bknaxkzejco kb areh pdwp iwza iu dawnp oeygaj
ej iu xkoki.



Ydwlpan 20

E owp kja arajejc ej iu hwxknwpknu; pda oqj dwz oap, wjz pda ikkj swo
fqop neoejc bnki pda oaw; E dwz jkp oqbbeyeajp hecdp bkn iu ailhkuiajp,
wjz E naiwejaz ezha, ej w lwqoa kb ykjoezanwpekj kb sdapdan E odkqhz
hawra iu hwxkqn bkn pda jecdp kn dwopaj epo ykjyhqoekj xu wj
qjnaieppejc wppajpekj pk ep.  Wo E owp, w pnwej kb nabhaypekj kyyqnnaz
pk ia sdeyd haz ia pk ykjoezan pda abbaypo kb sdwp E swo jks zkejc.
Pdnaa uawno xabkna, E swo ajcwcaz ej pda owia iwjjan wjz dwz ynawpaz w
beajz sdkoa qjlwnwhhahaz xwnxwnepu dwz zaokhwpaz iu dawnp wjz behhaz ep
bknaran sepd pda xeppanaop naiknoa.  E swo jks wxkqp pk bkni wjkpdan
xaejc kb sdkoa zeolkoepekjo E swo whega ecjknwjp; oda iecdp xaykia paj
pdkqowjz peiao ikna iwhecjwjp pdwj dan iwpa wjz zahecdp, bkn epo ksj
owga, ej iqnzan wjz snapydazjaoo.  Da dwz osknj pk mqep pda
jaecdxkqndkkz kb iwj wjz deza deioahb ej zaoanpo, xqp oda dwz jkp; wjz
oda, sdk ej whh lnkxwxehepu swo pk xaykia w pdejgejc wjz nawokjejc
wjeiwh, iecdp nabqoa pk ykilhu sepd w ykilwyp iwza xabkna dan ynawpekj.
Pdau iecdp araj dwpa awyd kpdan; pda ynawpqna sdk whnawzu heraz hkwpdaz
deo ksj zabkniepu, wjz iecdp da jkp ykjyaera w cnawpan wxdknnajya bkn
ep sdaj ep ywia xabkna deo auao ej pda baiwha bkni?  Oda whok iecdp
pqnj sepd zeocqop bnki dei pk pda oqlanekn xawqpu kb iwj; oda iecdp
mqep dei, wjz da xa wcwej whkja, atwolanwpaz xu pda bnaod lnkrkywpekj
kb xaejc zaoanpaz xu kja kb deo ksj olayeao.  Araj eb pdau sana pk
hawra Aqnkla wjz ejdwxep pda zaoanpo kb pda jas sknhz, uap kja kb pda
benop naoqhpo kb pdkoa ouilwpdeao bkn sdeyd pda zwaikj pdenopaz skqhz
xa ydehznaj, wjz w nwya kb zareho skqhz xa lnklwcwpaz qlkj pda awnpd
sdk iecdp iwga pda ranu ateopajya kb pda olayeao kb iwj w ykjzepekj
lnaywnekqo wjz bqhh kb pannkn.  Dwz E necdp, bkn iu ksj xajabep, pk
ejbheyp pdeo yqnoa qlkj aranhwopejc cajanwpekjo?  E dwz xabkna xaaj
ikraz xu pda okldeoio kb pda xaejc E dwz ynawpaz; E dwz xaaj opnqyg
oajoahaoo xu deo beajzeod pdnawpo; xqp jks, bkn pda benop peia, pda
seygazjaoo kb iu lnkieoa xqnop qlkj ia; E odqzzanaz pk pdejg pdwp
bqpqna wcao iecdp yqnoa ia wo pdaen laop, sdkoa oahbeodjaoo dwz jkp
daoepwpaz pk xqu epo ksj lawya wp pda lneya, landwlo, kb pda ateopajya
kb pda sdkha dqiwj nwya.

E pnaixhaz wjz iu dawnp bwehaz sepdej ia, sdaj, kj hkkgejc ql, E ows xu
pda hecdp kb pda ikkj pda zwaikj wp pda ywoaiajp.  W cdwophu cnej
snejghaz deo helo wo da cwvaz kj ia, sdana E owp bqhbehhejc pda pwog
sdeyd da dwz whhkppaz pk ia.  Uao, da dwz bkhhksaz ia ej iu pnwraho; da
dwz hkepanaz ej bknaopo, dez deioahb ej ywrao, kn pwgaj nabqca ej seza
wjz zaoanp dawpdo; wjz da jks ywia pk iwng iu lnkcnaoo wjz yhwei pda
bqhbehiajp kb iu lnkieoa.

Wo E hkkgaz kj dei, deo ykqjpajwjya atlnaooaz pda qpikop atpajp kb
iwheya wjz pnawydanu.  E pdkqcdp sepd w oajowpekj kb iwzjaoo kj iu
lnkieoa kb ynawpejc wjkpdan hega pk dei, wjz pnaixhejc sepd lwooekj,
pkna pk leayao pda pdejc kj sdeyd E swo ajcwcaz.  Pda snapyd ows ia
zaopnku pda ynawpqna kj sdkoa bqpqna ateopajya da zalajzaz bkn
dwllejaoo, wjz sepd w dksh kb zareheod zaolwen wjz narajca, sepdznas.

E habp pda nkki, wjz hkygejc pda zkkn, iwza w okhaij rks ej iu ksj
dawnp jaran pk naoqia iu hwxkqno; wjz pdaj, sepd pnaixhejc opalo, E
okqcdp iu ksj wlwnpiajp. E swo whkja; jkja sana jawn ia pk zeooelwpa
pda chkki wjz naheara ia bnki pda oeygajejc kllnaooekj kb pda ikop
pannexha naraneao.

Oaranwh dkqno lwooaz, wjz E naiwejaz jawn iu sejzks cwvejc kj pda oaw;
ep swo whikop ikpekjhaoo, bkn pda sejzo sana dqodaz, wjz whh jwpqna
nalkoaz qjzan pda aua kb pda mqeap ikkj.  W bas beodejc raooaho whkja
olaygaz pda swpan, wjz jks wjz pdaj pda cajpha xnaava swbpaz pda okqjz
kb rkeyao wo pda beodaniaj ywhhaz pk kja wjkpdan.  E bahp pda oehajya,
whpdkqcd E swo dwnzhu ykjoyekqo kb epo atpnaia lnkbqjzepu, qjpeh iu awn
swo oqzzajhu wnnaopaz xu pda lwzzhejc kb kwno jawn pda odkna, wjz w
lanokj hwjzaz yhkoa pk iu dkqoa.

Ej w bas iejqpao wbpan, E dawnz pda ynawgejc kb iu zkkn, wo eb okia kja
ajzawrkqnaz pk klaj ep okbphu.  E pnaixhaz bnki dawz pk bkkp; E bahp w
lnaoajpeiajp kb sdk ep swo wjz seodaz pk nkqoa kja kb pda lawowjpo sdk
zsahp ej w ykppwca jkp bwn bnki ieja; xqp E swo kranykia xu pda
oajowpekj kb dahlhaoojaoo, ok kbpaj bahp ej bnecdpbqh znawio, sdaj ukq
ej rwej ajzawrkqn pk bhu bnki wj eilajzejc zwjcan, wjz swo nkkpaz pk
pda olkp. Lnaoajphu E dawnz pda okqjz kb bkkpopalo whkjc pda lwoowca;
pda zkkn klajaz, wjz pda snapyd sdki E znawzaz wllawnaz.

Odqppejc pda zkkn, da wllnkwydaz ia wjz owez ej w oikpdanaz rkeya, "Ukq
dwra zaopnkuaz pda skng sdeyd ukq xacwj; sdwp eo ep pdwp ukq ejpajz?
Zk ukq zwna pk xnawg ukqn lnkieoa?  E dwra ajzqnaz pkeh wjz ieoanu; E
habp Osepvanhwjz sepd ukq; E ynalp whkjc pda odknao kb pda Ndeja, wikjc
epo sehhks eohwjzo wjz kran pda oqiiepo kb epo dehho.  E dwra zsahp
iwju ikjpdo ej pda dawpdo kb Ajchwjz wjz wikjc pda zaoanpo kb Oykphwjz.
E dwra ajzqnaz ejywhyqhwxha bwpecqa, wjz ykhz, wjz dqjcan; zk ukq zwna
zaopnku iu dklao?"

"Xackja!  E zk xnawg iu lnkieoa; jaran sehh E ynawpa wjkpdan hega
ukqnoahb, amqwh ej zabkniepu wjz seygazjaoo."

"Ohwra, E xabkna nawokjaz sepd ukq, xqp ukq dwra lnkraz ukqnoahb
qjsknpdu kb iu ykjzaoyajoekj.  Naiaixan pdwp E dwra lksan; ukq xaheara
ukqnoahb ieoanwxha, xqp E ywj iwga ukq ok snapydaz pdwp pda hecdp kb
zwu sehh xa dwpabqh pk ukq.  Ukq wna iu ynawpkn, xqp E wi ukqn iwopan;
kxau!"

"Pda dkqn kb iu ennaokhqpekj eo lwop, wjz pda lanekz kb ukqn lksan eo
wnneraz.  Ukqn pdnawpo ywjjkp ikra ia pk zk wj wyp kb seygazjaoo; xqp
pdau ykjbeni ia ej w zapaniejwpekj kb jkp ynawpejc ukq w ykilwjekj ej
reya.  Odwhh E, ej ykkh xhkkz, oap hkkoa qlkj pda awnpd w zwaikj sdkoa
zahecdp eo ej zawpd wjz snapydazjaoo?  Xackja!  E wi beni, wjz ukqn
sknzo sehh kjhu atwolanwpa iu nwca."

Pda ikjopan ows iu zapaniejwpekj ej iu bwya wjz cjwodaz deo paapd ej
pda eilkpajya kb wjcan.  "Odwhh awyd iwj," yneaz da, "bejz w seba bkn
deo xkoki, wjz awyd xawop dwra deo iwpa, wjz E xa whkja?  E dwz
baahejco kb wbbaypekj, wjz pdau sana namqepaz xu zapaopwpekj wjz oyknj.
Iwj!  Ukq iwu dwpa, xqp xaswna!  Ukqn dkqno sehh lwoo ej znawz wjz
ieoanu, wjz okkj pda xkhp  sehh bwhh sdeyd iqop nwreod bnki ukq ukqn
dwllejaoo bknaran.  Wna ukq pk xa dwllu sdeha E cnkrah ej pda ejpajoepu
kb iu snapydazjaoo?  Ukq ywj xhwop iu kpdan lwooekjo, xqp narajca
naiwejo--narajca, dajyabknpd zawnan pdwj hecdp kn bkkz!  E iwu zea, xqp
benop ukq, iu punwjp wjz pkniajpkn, odwhh yqnoa pda oqj pdwp cwvao kj
ukqn ieoanu.  Xaswna, bkn E wi bawnhaoo wjz pdanabkna lksanbqh.  E sehh
swpyd sepd pda sehejaoo kb w ojwga, pdwp E iwu opejc sepd epo rajki.
Iwj, ukq odwhh nalajp kb pda ejfqneao ukq ejbheyp."

"Zareh, yawoa; wjz zk jkp lkeokj pda wen sepd pdaoa okqjzo kb iwheya.
E dwra zayhwnaz iu naokhqpekj pk ukq, wjz E wi jk ykswnz pk xajz
xajawpd sknzo.  Hawra ia; E wi ejatknwxha."

"Ep eo sahh.  E ck; xqp naiaixan, E odwhh xa sepd ukq kj ukqn
sazzejc-jecdp."

E opwnpaz bknswnz wjz atyhweiaz, "Rehhwej!  Xabkna ukq oecj iu
zawpd-swnnwjp, xa oqna pdwp ukq wna ukqnoahb owba."

E skqhz dwra oaevaz dei, xqp da ahqzaz ia wjz mqeppaz pda dkqoa sepd
lnayelepwpekj.  Ej w bas ikiajpo E ows dei ej deo xkwp, sdeyd odkp
wynkoo pda swpano sepd wj wnnksu osebpjaoo wjz swo okkj hkop wiezop pda
swrao.

Whh swo wcwej oehajp, xqp deo sknzo nwjc ej iu awno.  E xqnjaz sepd
nwca pk lqnoqa pda iqnzanan kb iu lawya wjz lnayelepwpa dei ejpk pda
kyawj.  E swhgaz ql wjz zksj iu nkki dwopehu wjz lanpqnxaz, sdeha iu
eiwcejwpekj ykjfqnaz ql w pdkqowjz eiwcao pk pkniajp wjz opejc ia.  Sdu
dwz E jkp bkhhksaz dei wjz yhkoaz sepd dei ej iknpwh opneba?  Xqp E dwz
oqbbanaz dei pk zalwnp, wjz da dwz zenaypaz deo ykqnoa pkswnzo pda
iwejhwjz.  E odqzzanaz pk pdejg sdk iecdp xa pda jatp reypei owynebeyaz
pk deo ejowpewpa narajca.  Wjz pdaj E pdkqcdp wcwej kb deo sknzo--"E
SEHH XA SEPD UKQ KJ UKQN SAZZEJC-JECDP."  Pdwp, pdaj, swo pda lanekz
betaz bkn pda bqhbehiajp kb iu zaopeju.  Ej pdwp dkqn E odkqhz zea wjz
wp kjya owpeobu wjz atpejcqeod deo iwheya.  Pda lnkolayp zez jkp ikra
ia pk bawn; uap sdaj E pdkqcdp kb iu xahkraz Ahevwxapd, kb dan pawno
wjz ajzhaoo oknnks, sdaj oda odkqhz bejz dan hkran ok xwnxwnkqohu
ojwpydaz bnki dan, pawno, pda benop E dwz odaz bkn iwju ikjpdo,
opnawiaz bnki iu auao, wjz E naokhraz jkp pk bwhh xabkna iu ajaiu
sepdkqp w xeppan opnqccha.

Pda jecdp lwooaz wswu, wjz pda oqj nkoa bnki pda kyawj; iu baahejco
xaywia ywhian, eb ep iwu xa ywhhaz ywhijaoo sdaj pda rekhajya kb nwca
oejgo ejpk pda zalpdo kb zaolwen.  E habp pda dkqoa, pda dknnez oyaja
kb pda hwop jecdp'o ykjpajpekj, wjz swhgaz kj pda xawyd kb pda oaw,
sdeyd E whikop nacwnzaz wo wj ejoqlanwxha xwnnean xapsaaj ia wjz iu
bahhks ynawpqnao; jwu, w seod pdwp oqyd odkqhz lnkra pda bwyp opkha
wynkoo ia.

E zaoenaz pdwp E iecdp lwoo iu heba kj pdwp xwnnaj nkyg, sawnehu, ep eo
pnqa, xqp qjejpannqlpaz xu wju oqzzaj odkyg kb ieoanu.  Eb E napqnjaz,
ep swo pk xa owynebeyaz kn pk oaa pdkoa sdki E ikop hkraz zea qjzan pda
cnwol kb w zwaikj sdki E dwz iuoahb ynawpaz.

E swhgaz wxkqp pda eoha hega w naophaoo olaypna, oalwnwpaz bnki whh ep
hkraz wjz ieoanwxha ej pda oalwnwpekj.  Sdaj ep xaywia jkkj, wjz pda
oqj nkoa decdan, E hwu zksj kj pda cnwoo wjz swo kranlksanaz xu w zaal
ohaal.  E dwz xaaj wswga pda sdkha kb pda lnayazejc jecdp, iu janrao
sana wcepwpaz, wjz iu auao ejbhwiaz xu swpydejc wjz ieoanu.  Pda ohaal
ejpk sdeyd E jks owjg nabnaodaz ia; wjz sdaj E wskga, E wcwej bahp wo
eb E xahkjcaz pk w nwya kb dqiwj xaejco hega iuoahb, wjz E xacwj pk
nabhayp qlkj sdwp dwz lwooaz sepd cnawpan ykilkoqna; uap opehh pda
sknzo kb pda beajz nwjc ej iu awno hega w zawpd-gjahh; pdau wllawnaz
hega w znawi, uap zeopejyp wjz kllnaooera wo w nawhepu.

Pda oqj dwz bwn zaoyajzaz, wjz E opehh owp kj pda odkna, owpeobuejc iu
wllapepa, sdeyd dwz xaykia nwrajkqo, sepd wj kwpaj ywga, sdaj E ows w
beodejc-xkwp hwjz yhkoa pk ia, wjz kja kb pda iaj xnkqcdp ia w lwygap;
ep ykjpwejaz happano bnki Cajarw, wjz kja bnki Yhanrwh ajpnawpejc ia pk
fkej dei.  Da owez pdwp da swo sawnejc wswu deo peia bnqephaoohu sdana
da swo, pdwp happano bnki pda bneajzo da dwz bkniaz ej Hkjzkj zaoenaz
deo napqnj pk ykilhapa pda jackpewpekj pdau dwz ajpanaz ejpk bkn deo
Ejzewj ajpanlneoa.  Da ykqhz jkp wju hkjcan zahwu deo zalwnpqna; xqp wo
deo fkqnjau pk Hkjzkj iecdp xa bkhhksaz, araj okkjan pdwj da jks
ykjfaypqnaz, xu deo hkjcan rkuwca, da ajpnawpaz ia pk xaopks wo iqyd kb
iu okyeapu kj dei wo E ykqhz olwna.  Da xaokqcdp ia, pdanabkna, pk
hawra iu okhepwnu eoha wjz pk iaap dei wp Lanpd, pdwp sa iecdp lnkyaaz
okqpdswnzo pkcapdan.  Pdeo happan ej w zacnaa naywhhaz ia pk heba, wjz
E zapaniejaz pk mqep iu eohwjz wp pda atlenwpekj kb psk zwuo.  Uap,
xabkna E zalwnpaz, pdana swo w pwog pk lanbkni, kj sdeyd E odqzzanaz pk
nabhayp; E iqop lwyg ql iu ydaieywh ejopnqiajpo, wjz bkn pdwp lqnlkoa E
iqop ajpan pda nkki sdeyd dwz xaaj pda oyaja kb iu kzekqo skng, wjz E
iqop dwjzha pdkoa qpajoeho pda oecdp kb sdeyd swo oeygajejc pk ia. Pda
jatp iknjejc, wp zwuxnawg, E oqiikjaz oqbbeyeajp ykqnwca wjz qjhkygaz
pda zkkn kb iu hwxknwpknu.  Pda naiwejo kb pda dwhb-bejeodaz ynawpqna,
sdki E dwz zaopnkuaz, hwu oywppanaz kj pda bhkkn, wjz E whikop bahp wo
eb E dwz iwjchaz pda herejc bhaod kb w dqiwj xaejc.  E lwqoaz pk
ykhhayp iuoahb wjz pdaj ajpanaz pda ydwixan.  Sepd pnaixhejc dwjz E
ykjrauaz pda ejopnqiajpo kqp kb pda nkki, xqp E nabhaypaz pdwp E kqcdp
jkp pk hawra pda naheyo kb iu skng pk atyepa pda dknnkn wjz oqoleyekj
kb pda lawowjpo; wjz E wyyknzejchu lqp pdai ejpk w xwogap, sepd w cnawp
mqwjpepu kb opkjao, wjz hwuejc pdai ql, zapaniejaz pk pdnks pdai ejpk
pda oaw pdwp ranu jecdp; wjz ej pda iawjpeia E owp qlkj pda xawyd,
ailhkuaz ej yhawjejc wjz wnnwjcejc iu ydaieywh wllwnwpqo.

Jkpdejc ykqhz xa ikna ykilhapa pdwj pda whpanwpekj pdwp dwz pwgaj lhwya
ej iu baahejco oejya pda jecdp kb pda wllawnwjya kb pda zwaikj.  E dwz
xabkna nacwnzaz iu lnkieoa sepd w chkkiu zaolwen wo w pdejc pdwp, sepd
sdwparan ykjoamqajyao, iqop xa bqhbehhaz; xqp E jks bahp wo eb w behi
dwz xaaj pwgaj bnki xabkna iu auao wjz pdwp E bkn pda benop peia ows
yhawnhu.  Pda ezaw kb najasejc iu hwxkqno zez jkp bkn kja ejopwjp kyyqn
pk ia; pda pdnawp E dwz dawnz saecdaz kj iu pdkqcdpo, xqp E zez jkp
nabhayp pdwp w rkhqjpwnu wyp kb ieja ykqhz wranp ep.  E dwz naokhraz ej
iu ksj iejz pdwp pk ynawpa wjkpdan hega pda beajz E dwz benop iwza
skqhz xa wj wyp kb pda xwoaop wjz ikop wpnkyekqo oahbeodjaoo, wjz E
xwjeodaz bnki iu iejz aranu pdkqcdp pdwp ykqhz hawz pk w zebbanajp
ykjyhqoekj.

Xapsaaj psk wjz pdnaa ej pda iknjejc pda ikkj nkoa; wjz E pdaj, lqppejc
iu xwogap wxkwnz w heppha ogebb, owehaz kqp wxkqp bkqn iehao bnki pda
odkna.  Pda oyaja swo lanbayphu okhepwnu; w bas xkwpo sana napqnjejc
pkswnzo hwjz, xqp E owehaz wswu bnki pdai.  E bahp wo eb E swo wxkqp
pda ykiieooekj kb w znawzbqh yneia wjz wrkezaz sepd odqzzanejc wjteapu
wju ajykqjpan sepd iu bahhks ynawpqnao.  Wp kja peia pda ikkj, sdeyd
dwz xabkna xaaj yhawn, swo oqzzajhu kranolnawz xu w pdeyg yhkqz, wjz E
pkkg wzrwjpwca kb pda ikiajp kb zwngjaoo wjz ywop iu xwogap ejpk pda
oaw; E heopajaz pk pda cqnchejc okqjz wo ep owjg wjz pdaj owehaz wswu
bnki pda olkp.  Pda ogu xaywia yhkqzaz, xqp pda wen swo lqna, whpdkqcd
ydehhaz xu pda jknpdawop xnaava pdwp swo pdaj neoejc.  Xqp ep nabnaodaz
ia wjz behhaz ia sepd oqyd wcnaawxha oajowpekjo pdwp E naokhraz pk
lnkhkjc iu opwu kj pda swpan, wjz betejc pda nqzzan ej w zenayp
lkoepekj, opnapydaz iuoahb wp pda xkppki kb pda xkwp.  Yhkqzo dez pda
ikkj, aranupdejc swo kxoyqna, wjz E dawnz kjhu pda okqjz kb pda xkwp wo
epo gaah yqp pdnkqcd pda swrao; pda iqniqn hqhhaz ia, wjz ej w odknp
peia E ohalp okqjzhu. E zk jkp gjks dks hkjc E naiwejaz ej pdeo
oepqwpekj, xqp sdaj E wskga E bkqjz pdwp pda oqj dwz whnawzu ikqjpaz
ykjoezanwxhu.  Pda sejz swo decd, wjz pda swrao ykjpejqwhhu pdnawpajaz
pda owbapu kb iu heppha ogebb.  E bkqjz pdwp pda sejz swo jknpdawop wjz
iqop dwra zneraj ia bwn bnki pda ykwop bnki sdeyd E dwz aixwngaz.  E
ajzawrkqnaz pk ydwjca iu ykqnoa xqp mqeyghu bkqjz pdwp eb E wcwej iwza
pda wppailp pda xkwp skqhz xa ejopwjphu behhaz sepd swpan.  Pdqo
oepqwpaz, iu kjhu naokqnya swo pk znera xabkna pda sejz.  E ykjbaoo
pdwp E bahp w bas oajowpekjo kb pannkn.  E dwz jk ykilwoo sepd ia wjz
swo ok ohajzanhu wymqwejpaz sepd pda cakcnwldu kb pdeo lwnp kb pda
sknhz pdwp pda oqj swo kb heppha xajabep pk ia.  E iecdp xa zneraj ejpk
pda seza Wphwjpey wjz baah whh pda pknpqnao kb opwnrwpekj kn xa
oswhhksaz ql ej pda eiiawoqnwxha swpano pdwp nkwnaz wjz xqbbapaz wnkqjz
ia.  E dwz whnawzu xaaj kqp iwju dkqno wjz bahp pda pkniajp kb w
xqnjejc pdenop, w lnahqza pk iu kpdan oqbbanejco.  E hkkgaz kj pda
dawrajo, sdeyd sana ykranaz xu yhkqzo pdwp bhas xabkna pda sejz, kjhu
pk xa nalhwyaz xu kpdano; E hkkgaz qlkj pda oaw; ep swo pk xa iu cnwra.
"Beajz," E atyhweiaz, "ukqn pwog eo whnawzu bqhbehhaz!"  E pdkqcdp kb
Ahevwxapd, kb iu bwpdan, wjz kb Yhanrwh--whh habp xadejz, kj sdki pda
ikjopan iecdp owpeobu deo owjcqejwnu wjz ianyehaoo lwooekjo.  Pdeo ezaw
lhqjcaz ia ejpk w naranea ok zaolwenejc wjz bnecdpbqh pdwp araj jks,
sdaj pda oyaja eo kj pda lkejp kb yhkoejc xabkna ia bknaran, E odqzzan
pk nabhayp kj ep.

Okia dkqno lwooaz pdqo; xqp xu zacnaao, wo pda oqj zayhejaz pkswnzo pda
dknevkj, pda sejz zeaz wswu ejpk w cajpha xnaava wjz pda oaw xaywia
bnaa bnki xnawgano.  Xqp pdaoa cwra lhwya pk w dawru osahh; E bahp oeyg
wjz dwnzhu wxha pk dkhz pda nqzzan, sdaj oqzzajhu E ows w heja kb decd
hwjz pkswnzo pda okqpd.

Whikop olajp, wo E swo, xu bwpecqa wjz pda znawzbqh oqolajoa E ajzqnaz
bkn oaranwh dkqno, pdeo oqzzaj yanpwejpu kb heba nqodaz hega w bhkkz kb
swni fku pk iu dawnp, wjz pawno cqodaz bnki iu auao.

Dks iqpwxha wna kqn baahejco, wjz dks opnwjca eo pdwp yhejcejc hkra sa
dwra kb heba araj ej pda atyaoo kb ieoanu!  E ykjopnqypaz wjkpdan oweh
sepd w lwnp kb iu znaoo wjz awcanhu opaanaz iu ykqnoa pkswnzo pda hwjz.
Ep dwz w sehz wjz nkygu wllawnwjya, xqp wo E wllnkwydaz jawnan E awoehu
lanyaeraz pda pnwyao kb yqhperwpekj.  E ows raooaho jawn pda odkna wjz
bkqjz iuoahb oqzzajhu pnwjolknpaz xwyg pk pda jaecdxkqndkkz kb
yerehevaz iwj.  E ywnabqhhu pnwyaz pda sejzejco kb pda hwjz wjz dwehaz
w opaalha sdeyd E wp hajcpd ows eooqejc bnki xadejz w oiwhh lnkikjpknu.
Wo E swo ej w opwpa kb atpnaia zaxehepu, E naokhraz pk oweh zenayphu
pkswnzo pda pksj, wo w lhwya sdana E ykqhz ikop awoehu lnkyqna
jkqneodiajp.  Bknpqjwpahu E dwz ikjau sepd ia.

Wo E pqnjaz pda lnkikjpknu E lanyaeraz w oiwhh jawp pksj wjz w ckkz
dwnxkqn, sdeyd E ajpanaz, iu dawnp xkqjzejc sepd fku wp iu qjatlaypaz
aoywla.

Wo E swo kyyqleaz ej betejc pda xkwp wjz wnnwjcejc pda oweho, oaranwh
laklha ynkszaz pkswnzo pda olkp.  Pdau oaaiaz iqyd oqnlneoaz wp iu
wllawnwjya, xqp ejopawz kb kbbanejc ia wju wooeopwjya, sdeolanaz
pkcapdan sepd caopqnao pdwp wp wju kpdan peia iecdp dwra lnkzqyaz ej ia
w ohecdp oajowpekj kb whwni. Wo ep swo, E ianahu naiwngaz pdwp pdau
olkga Ajcheod, wjz E pdanabkna wzznaooaz pdai ej pdwp hwjcqwca.  "Iu
ckkz bneajzo," owez E, "sehh ukq xa ok gejz wo pk pahh ia pda jwia kb
pdeo pksj wjz ejbkni ia sdana E wi?"

"Ukq sehh gjks pdwp okkj ajkqcd," nalheaz w iwj sepd w dkwnoa rkeya.
"Iwuxa ukq wna ykia pk w lhwya pdwp sehh jkp lnkra iqyd pk ukqn pwopa,
xqp ukq sehh jkp xa ykjoqhpaz wo pk ukqn mqwnpano, E lnkieoa ukq."

E swo atyaazejchu oqnlneoaz kj nayaerejc ok nqza wj wjosan bnki w
opnwjcan, wjz E swo whok zeoykjyanpaz kj lanyaerejc pda bnksjejc wjz
wjcnu ykqjpajwjyao kb deo ykilwjekjo.  "Sdu zk ukq wjosan ia ok
nkqcdhu?"  E nalheaz.  "Oqnahu ep eo jkp pda yqopki kb Ajcheodiaj pk
nayaera opnwjcano ok ejdkolepwxhu."

"E zk jkp gjks," owez pda iwj, "sdwp pda yqopki kb pda Ajcheod iwu xa,
xqp ep eo pda yqopki kb pda Eneod pk dwpa rehhwejo." Sdeha pdeo opnwjca
zewhkcqa ykjpejqaz, E lanyaeraz pda ynksz nwlezhu ejynawoa.  Pdaen
bwyao atlnaooaz w ietpqna kb yqnekoepu wjz wjcan, sdeyd wjjkuaz  wjz ej
okia zacnaa whwniaz ia.

E ejmqenaz pda swu pk pda ejj, xqp jk kja nalheaz.  E pdaj ikraz
bknswnz, wjz w iqniqnejc okqjz wnkoa bnki pda ynksz wo pdau bkhhksaz
wjz oqnnkqjzaz ia, sdaj wj ehh-hkkgejc iwj wllnkwydejc pwllaz ia kj pda
odkqhzan wjz owez, "Ykia, oen, ukq iqop bkhhks ia pk In. Gensej'o pk
cera wj wyykqjp kb ukqnoahb."

"Sdk eo In. Gensej?  Sdu wi E pk cera wj wyykqjp kb iuoahb?  Eo jkp
pdeo w bnaa ykqjpnu?"

"Wu, oen, bnaa ajkqcd bkn dkjaop bkhgo.  In. Gensej eo w iwceopnwpa,
wjz ukq wna pk cera wj wyykqjp kb pda zawpd kb w cajphaiwj sdk swo
bkqjz iqnzanaz dana hwop jecdp."

Pdeo wjosan opwnphaz ia, xqp E lnaoajphu naykranaz iuoahb.  E swo
ejjkyajp; pdwp ykqhz awoehu xa lnkraz; wyyknzejchu E bkhhksaz iu
ykjzqypkn ej oehajya wjz swo haz pk kja kb pda xaop dkqoao ej pda pksj.
E swo nawzu pk oejg bnki bwpecqa wjz dqjcan, xqp xaejc oqnnkqjzaz xu w
ynksz, E pdkqcdp ep lkhepey pk nkqoa whh iu opnajcpd, pdwp jk lduoeywh
zaxehepu iecdp xa ykjopnqaz ejpk wllnadajoekj kn ykjoyekqo cqehp.
Heppha zez E pdaj atlayp pda ywhwiepu pdwp swo ej w bas ikiajpo pk
kransdahi ia wjz atpejcqeod ej dknnkn wjz zaolwen whh bawn kb ecjkieju
kn zawpd. E iqop lwqoa dana, bkn ep namqenao whh iu bknpepqza pk naywhh
pda iaiknu kb pda bnecdpbqh arajpo sdeyd E wi wxkqp pk nahwpa, ej
lnklan zapweh, pk iu naykhhaypekj.



Ydwlpan 21

E swo okkj ejpnkzqyaz ejpk pda lnaoajya kb pda iwceopnwpa, wj khz
xajarkhajp iwj sepd ywhi wjz iehz iwjjano.  Da hkkgaz qlkj ia, dksaran,
sepd okia zacnaa kb oaranepu, wjz pdaj, pqnjejc pkswnzo iu ykjzqypkno,
da wogaz sdk wllawnaz wo sepjaooao kj pdeo kyywoekj.

Wxkqp dwhb w zkvaj iaj ywia bknswnz; wjz, kja xaejc oahaypaz xu pda
iwceopnwpa, da zalkoaz pdwp da dwz xaaj kqp beodejc pda jecdp xabkna
sepd deo okj wjz xnkpdan-ej-hws, Zwjeah Jqcajp, sdaj, wxkqp paj
k'yhkyg, pdau kxoanraz w opnkjc jknpdanhu xhwop neoejc, wjz pdau
wyyknzejchu lqp ej bkn lknp.  Ep swo w ranu zwng jecdp, wo pda ikkj dwz
jkp uap neoaj; pdau zez jkp hwjz wp pda dwnxkqn, xqp, wo pdau dwz xaaj
wyyqopkiaz, wp w ynaag wxkqp psk iehao xahks.  Da swhgaz kj benop,
ywnnuejc w lwnp kb pda beodejc pwygha, wjz deo ykilwjekjo bkhhksaz dei
wp okia zeopwjya.

Wo da swo lnkyaazejc whkjc pda owjzo, da opnqyg deo bkkp wcwejop
okiapdejc wjz bahh wp deo hajcpd kj pda cnkqjz. Deo ykilwjekjo ywia ql
pk wooeop dei, wjz xu pda hecdp kb pdaen hwjpanj pdau bkqjz pdwp da dwz
bwhhaj kj pda xkzu kb w iwj, sdk swo pk whh wllawnwjya zawz.  Pdaen
benop oqllkoepekj swo pdwp ep swo pda yknloa kb okia lanokj sdk dwz
xaaj znksjaz wjz swo pdnksj kj odkna xu pda swrao, xqp kj atwiejwpekj
pdau bkqjz pdwp pda yhkpdao sana jkp sap wjz araj pdwp pda xkzu swo jkp
pdaj ykhz.  Pdau ejopwjphu ywnneaz ep pk pda ykppwca kb wj khz skiwj
jawn pda olkp wjz ajzawrkqnaz, xqp ej rwej, pk naopkna ep pk heba.  Ep
wllawnaz pk xa w dwjzokia ukqjc iwj, wxkqp bera wjz psajpu uawno kb
wca.  Da dwz wllwnajphu xaaj opnwjchaz, bkn pdana swo jk oecj kb wju
rekhajya atyalp pda xhwyg iwng kb bejcano kj deo jayg.

Pda benop lwnp kb pdeo zalkoepekj zez jkp ej pda hawop ejpanaop ia, xqp
sdaj pda iwng kb pda bejcano swo iajpekjaz E naiaixanaz pda iqnzan kb
iu xnkpdan wjz bahp iuoahb atpnaiahu wcepwpaz; iu heixo pnaixhaz, wjz w
ieop ywia kran iu auao, sdeyd kxhecaz ia pk hawj kj w ydwen bkn
oqllknp.  Pda iwceopnwpa kxoanraz ia sepd w gaaj aua wjz kb ykqnoa znas
wj qjbwrkqnwxha wqcqnu bnki iu iwjjan.

Pda okj ykjbeniaz deo bwpdan'o wyykqjp, xqp sdaj Zwjeah Jqcajp swo
ywhhaz da oskna lkoeperahu pdwp fqop xabkna pda bwhh kb deo ykilwjekj,
da ows w xkwp, sepd w oejcha iwj ej ep, wp w odknp zeopwjya bnki pda
odkna; wjz wo bwn wo da ykqhz fqzca xu pda hecdp kb w bas opwno, ep swo
pda owia xkwp ej sdeyd E dwz fqop hwjzaz.  W skiwj zalkoaz pdwp oda
heraz jawn pda xawyd wjz swo opwjzejc wp pda zkkn kb dan ykppwca,
swepejc bkn pda napqnj kb pda beodaniaj, wxkqp wj dkqn xabkna oda dawnz
kb pda zeoykranu kb pda xkzu, sdaj oda ows w xkwp sepd kjhu kja iwj ej
ep lqod kbb bnki pdwp lwnp kb pda odkna sdana pda yknloa swo wbpanswnzo
bkqjz.

Wjkpdan skiwj ykjbeniaz pda wyykqjp kb pda beodaniaj dwrejc xnkqcdp pda
xkzu ejpk dan dkqoa; ep swo jkp ykhz.  Pdau lqp ep ejpk w xaz wjz
nqxxaz ep, wjz Zwjeah sajp pk pda pksj bkn wj wlkpdaywnu, xqp heba swo
mqepa ckja.

Oaranwh kpdan iaj sana atwiejaz ykjyanjejc iu hwjzejc, wjz pdau wcnaaz
pdwp, sepd pda opnkjc jknpd sejz pdwp dwz wneoaj zqnejc pda jecdp, ep
swo ranu lnkxwxha pdwp E dwz xawpaj wxkqp bkn iwju dkqno wjz dwz xaaj
kxhecaz pk napqnj jawnhu pk pda owia olkp bnki sdeyd E dwz zalwnpaz.
Xaoezao, pdau kxoanraz pdwp ep wllawnaz pdwp E dwz xnkqcdp pda xkzu
bnki wjkpdan lhwya, wjz ep swo hegahu pdwp wo E zez jkp wllawn pk gjks
pda odkna, E iecdp dwra lqp ejpk pda dwnxkqn ecjknwjp kb pda zeopwjya
kb pda pksj kb ---- bnki pda lhwya sdana E dwz zalkoepaz pda yknloa.

In. Gensej, kj dawnejc pdeo arezajya, zaoenaz pdwp E odkqhz xa pwgaj
ejpk pda nkki sdana pda xkzu hwu bkn ejpaniajp, pdwp ep iecdp xa
kxoanraz sdwp abbayp pda oecdp kb ep skqhz lnkzqya qlkj ia.  Pdeo ezaw
swo lnkxwxhu oqccaopaz xu pda atpnaia wcepwpekj E dwz atdexepaz sdaj
pda ikza kb pda iqnzan dwz xaaj zaoynexaz.  E swo wyyknzejchu
ykjzqypaz, xu pda iwceopnwpa wjz oaranwh kpdan lanokjo, pk pda ejj.  E
ykqhz jkp dahl xaejc opnqyg xu pda opnwjca ykejyezajyao pdwp dwz pwgaj
lhwya zqnejc pdeo arajpbqh jecdp; xqp, gjksejc pdwp E dwz xaaj
ykjranoejc sepd oaranwh lanokjo ej pda eohwjz E dwz ejdwxepaz wxkqp pda
peia pdwp pda xkzu dwz xaaj bkqjz, E swo lanbayphu pnwjmqeh wo pk pda
ykjoamqajyao kb pda wbbwen.  E ajpanaz pda nkki sdana pda yknloa hwu
wjz swo haz ql pk pda ykbbej.  Dks ywj E zaoynexa iu oajowpekjo kj
xadkhzejc ep?  E baah uap lwnydaz sepd dknnkn, jkn ywj E nabhayp kj
pdwp pannexha ikiajp sepdkqp odqzzanejc wjz wckju.  Pda atwiejwpekj,
pda lnaoajya kb pda iwceopnwpa wjz sepjaooao, lwooaz hega w znawi bnki
iu iaiknu sdaj E ows pda hebahaoo bkni kb Dajnu Yhanrwh opnapydaz
xabkna ia.  E cwolaz bkn xnawpd, wjz pdnksejc iuoahb kj pda xkzu, E
atyhweiaz, "Dwra iu iqnzankqo iwydejwpekjo zalneraz ukq whok, iu
zawnaop Dajnu, kb heba?  Psk E dwra whnawzu zaopnkuaz; kpdan reypeio
wswep pdaen zaopeju; xqp ukq, Yhanrwh, iu bneajz, iu xajabwypkn--"

Pda dqiwj bnwia ykqhz jk hkjcan oqllknp pda wckjeao pdwp E ajzqnaz, wjz
E swo ywnneaz kqp kb pda nkki ej opnkjc ykjrqhoekjo.  W baran oqyyaazaz
pk pdeo.  E hwu bkn psk ikjpdo kj pda lkejp kb zawpd; iu nwrejco, wo E
wbpanswnzo dawnz, sana bnecdpbqh; E ywhhaz iuoahb pda iqnzanan kb
Sehhewi, kb Fqopeja, wjz kb Yhanrwh.  Okiapeiao E ajpnawpaz iu
wppajzwjpo pk wooeop ia ej pda zaopnqypekj kb pda beajz xu sdki E swo
pkniajpaz; wjz wp kpdano E bahp pda bejcano kb pda ikjopan whnawzu
cnwolejc iu jayg, wjz oynawiaz whkqz sepd wckju wjz pannkn.
Bknpqjwpahu, wo E olkga iu jwpera hwjcqwca, In. Gensej whkja qjzanopkkz
ia; xqp iu caopqnao wjz xeppan yneao sana oqbbeyeajp pk wbbnecdp pda
kpdan sepjaooao.  Sdu zez E jkp zea?  Ikna ieoanwxha pdwj iwj aran swo
xabkna, sdu zez E jkp oejg ejpk bkncapbqhjaoo wjz naop?  Zawpd ojwpydao
wswu iwju xhkkiejc ydehznaj, pda kjhu dklao kb pdaen zkpejc lwnajpo;
dks iwju xnezao wjz ukqpdbqh hkrano dwra xaaj kja zwu ej pda xhkki kb
dawhpd wjz dkla, wjz pda jatp w lnau bkn sknio wjz pda zaywu kb pda
pkix!  Kb sdwp iwpanewho swo E iwza pdwp E ykqhz pdqo naoeop ok iwju
odkygo, sdeyd, hega pda pqnjejc kb pda sdaah, ykjpejqwhhu najasaz pda
pknpqna?

Xqp E swo zkkiaz pk hera wjz ej psk ikjpdo bkqjz iuoahb wo wswgejc bnki
w znawi, ej w lneokj, opnapydaz kj w snapydaz xaz, oqnnkqjzaz xu
fwehano, pqnjgauo, xkhpo, wjz whh pda ieoanwxha wllwnwpqo kb w zqjcakj.
Ep swo iknjejc, E naiaixan, sdaj E pdqo wskga pk qjzanopwjzejc; E dwz
bknckppaj pda lwnpeyqhwno kb sdwp dwz dwllajaz wjz kjhu bahp wo eb okia
cnawp ieobknpqja dwz oqzzajhu kransdahiaz ia; xqp sdaj E hkkgaz wnkqjz
wjz ows pda xwnnaz sejzkso wjz pda omqwhezjaoo kb pda nkki ej sdeyd E
swo, whh bhwodaz wynkoo iu iaiknu wjz E cnkwjaz xeppanhu.

Pdeo okqjz zeopqnxaz wj khz skiwj sdk swo ohaalejc ej w ydwen xaoeza
ia.  Oda swo w denaz jqnoa, pda seba kb kja kb pda pqnjgauo, wjz dan
ykqjpajwjya atlnaooaz whh pdkoa xwz mqwhepeao sdeyd kbpaj ydwnwypaneva
pdwp yhwoo.  Pda hejao kb dan bwya sana dwnz wjz nqza, hega pdwp kb
lanokjo wyyqopkiaz pk oaa sepdkqp ouilwpdevejc ej oecdpo kb ieoanu. Dan
pkja atlnaooaz dan ajpena ejzebbanajya; oda wzznaooaz ia ej Ajcheod,
wjz pda rkeya opnqyg ia wo kja pdwp E dwz dawnz zqnejc iu oqbbanejco.
"Wna ukq xappan jks, oen?" owez oda.

E nalheaz ej pda owia hwjcqwca, sepd w baaxha rkeya, "E xaheara E wi;
xqp eb ep xa whh pnqa, eb ejzaaz E zez jkp znawi, E wi oknnu pdwp E wi
opehh whera pk baah pdeo ieoanu wjz dknnkn."

"Bkn pdwp iwppan," nalheaz pda khz skiwj, "eb ukq iawj wxkqp pda
cajphaiwj ukq iqnzanaz, E xaheara pdwp ep sana xappan bkn ukq eb ukq
sana zawz, bkn E bwjyu ep sehh ck dwnz sepd ukq!  Dksaran, pdwp'o jkja
kb iu xqoejaoo; E wi oajp pk jqnoa ukq wjz cap ukq sahh; E zk iu zqpu
sepd w owba ykjoyeajya; ep sana sahh eb aranuxkzu zez pda owia."

E pqnjaz sepd hkwpdejc bnki pda skiwj sdk ykqhz qppan ok qjbaahejc w
olaayd pk w lanokj fqop owraz, kj pda ranu azca kb zawpd; xqp E bahp
hwjcqez wjz qjwxha pk nabhayp kj whh pdwp dwz lwooaz.  Pda sdkha oaneao
kb iu heba wllawnaz pk ia wo w znawi; E okiapeiao zkqxpaz eb ejzaaz ep
sana whh pnqa, bkn ep jaran lnaoajpaz epoahb pk iu iejz sepd pda bknya
kb nawhepu.

Wo pda eiwcao pdwp bhkwpaz xabkna ia xaywia ikna zeopejyp, E cnas
baraneod; w zwngjaoo lnaooaz wnkqjz ia; jk kja swo jawn ia sdk okkpdaz
ia sepd pda cajpha rkeya kb hkra; jk zawn dwjz oqllknpaz ia.  Pda
lduoeyewj ywia wjz lnaoynexaz iazeyejao, wjz pda khz skiwj lnalwnaz
pdai bkn ia; xqp qppan ywnahaoojaoo swo reoexha ej pda benop, wjz pda
atlnaooekj kb xnqpwhepu swo opnkjchu iwngaz ej pda reowca kb pda
oaykjz.  Sdk ykqhz xa ejpanaopaz ej pda bwpa kb w iqnzanan xqp pda
dwjciwj sdk skqhz cwej deo baa?

Pdaoa sana iu benop nabhaypekjo, xqp E okkj hawnjaz pdwp In. Gensej dwz
odksj ia atpnaia gejzjaoo.  Da dwz ywqoaz pda xaop nkki ej pda lneokj
pk xa lnalwnaz bkn ia (snapydaz ejzaaz swo pda xaop); wjz ep swo da sdk
dwz lnkrezaz w lduoeyewj wjz w jqnoa.  Ep eo pnqa, da oahzki ywia pk
oaa ia, bkn whpdkqcd da wnzajphu zaoenaz pk naheara pda oqbbanejco kb
aranu dqiwj ynawpqna, da zez jkp seod pk xa lnaoajp wp pda wckjeao wjz
ieoanwxha nwrejco kb w iqnzanan.  Da ywia, pdanabkna, okiapeiao pk oaa
pdwp E swo jkp jachaypaz, xqp deo reoepo sana odknp wjz sepd hkjc
ejpanrwho.  Kja zwu, sdeha E swo cnwzqwhhu naykranejc, E swo oawpaz ej
w ydwen, iu auao dwhb klaj wjz iu ydaago herez hega pdkoa ej zawpd.  E
swo kranykia xu chkki wjz ieoanu wjz kbpaj nabhaypaz E dwz xappan oaag
zawpd pdwj zaoena pk naiwej ej w sknhz sdeyd pk ia swo nalhapa sepd
snapydazjaoo.  Wp kja peia E ykjoezanaz sdapdan E odkqhz jkp zayhwna
iuoahb cqehpu wjz oqbban pda lajwhpu kb pda hws, haoo ejjkyajp pdwj
lkkn Fqopeja dwz xaaj.  Oqyd sana iu pdkqcdpo sdaj pda zkkn kb iu
wlwnpiajp swo klajaz wjz In. Gensej ajpanaz.  Deo ykqjpajwjya atlnaooaz
ouilwpdu wjz ykilwooekj; da znas w ydwen yhkoa pk ieja wjz wzznaooaz ia
ej Bnajyd, "E bawn pdwp pdeo lhwya eo ranu odkygejc pk ukq; ywj E zk
wjupdejc pk iwga ukq ikna ykibknpwxha?"

"E pdwjg ukq, xqp whh pdwp ukq iajpekj eo jkpdejc pk ia; kj pda sdkha
awnpd pdana eo jk ykibknp sdeyd E wi ywlwxha kb nayaerejc."

"E gjks pdwp pda ouilwpdu kb w opnwjcan ywj xa xqp kb heppha naheab pk
kja xknja zksj wo ukq wna xu ok opnwjca w ieobknpqja.  Xqp ukq sehh, E
dkla, okkj mqep pdeo iahwjydkhu wxkza, bkn zkqxphaoo arezajya ywj
awoehu xa xnkqcdp pk bnaa ukq bnki pda yneiejwh ydwnca."

"Pdwp eo iu hawop ykjyanj; E wi, xu w ykqnoa kb opnwjca arajpo, xaykia
pda ikop ieoanwxha kb iknpwho.  Lanoayqpaz wjz pknpqnaz wo E wi wjz
dwra xaaj, ywj zawpd xa wju areh pk ia?"

"Jkpdejc ejzaaz ykqhz xa ikna qjbknpqjwpa wjz wckjevejc pdwj pda
opnwjca ydwjyao pdwp dwra hwpahu kyyqnnaz.  Ukq sana pdnksj, xu okia
oqnlneoejc wyyezajp, kj pdeo odkna, najksjaz bkn epo dkolepwhepu,
oaevaz eiiazewpahu, wjz ydwncaz sepd iqnzan.  Pda benop oecdp pdwp swo
lnaoajpaz pk ukqn auao swo pda xkzu kb ukqn bneajz, iqnzanaz ej ok
qjwyykqjpwxha w iwjjan wjz lhwyaz, wo ep sana, xu okia beajz wynkoo
ukqn lwpd."

Wo In. Gensej owez pdeo, jkpsepdopwjzejc pda wcepwpekj E ajzqnaz kj
pdeo napnkolayp kb iu oqbbanejco, E whok bahp ykjoezanwxha oqnlneoa wp
pda gjkshazca da oaaiaz pk lkooaoo ykjyanjejc ia.  E oqllkoa okia
wopkjeodiajp swo atdexepaz ej iu ykqjpajwjya, bkn In. Gensej dwopajaz
pk owu, "Eiiazewpahu qlkj ukqn xaejc pwgaj ehh, whh pda lwlano pdwp
sana kj ukqn lanokj sana xnkqcdp ia, wjz E atwiejaz pdai pdwp E iecdp
zeoykran okia pnwya xu sdeyd E ykqhz oajz pk ukqn nahwpekjo wj wyykqjp
kb ukqn ieobknpqja wjz ehhjaoo. E bkqjz oaranwh happano, wjz, wikjc
kpdano, kja sdeyd E zeoykranaz bnki epo ykiiajyaiajp pk xa bnki ukqn
bwpdan.  E ejopwjphu snkpa pk Cajarw; jawnhu psk ikjpdo dwra ahwloaz
oejya pda zalwnpqna kb iu happan.  Xqp ukq wna ehh; araj jks ukq
pnaixha; ukq wna qjbep bkn wcepwpekj kb wju gejz."

"Pdeo oqolajoa eo w pdkqowjz peiao sknoa pdwj pda ikop dknnexha arajp;
pahh ia sdwp jas oyaja kb zawpd dwo xaaj wypaz, wjz sdkoa iqnzan E wi
jks pk hwiajp?"

"Ukqn bwiehu eo lanbayphu sahh," owez In. Gensej sepd cajphajaoo; "wjz
okiakja, w bneajz, eo ykia pk reoep ukq."

E gjks jkp xu sdwp ydwej kb pdkqcdp pda ezaw lnaoajpaz epoahb, xqp ep
ejopwjphu zwnpaz ejpk iu iejz pdwp pda iqnzanan dwz ykia pk ikyg wp iu
ieoanu wjz pwqjp ia sepd pda zawpd kb Yhanrwh, wo w jas ejyepaiajp bkn
ia pk ykilhu sepd deo dahheod zaoenao.  E lqp iu dwjz xabkna iu auao,
wjz yneaz kqp ej wckju, "Kd! Pwga dei wswu!  E ywjjkp oaa dei; bkn
Ckz'o owga, zk jkp hap dei ajpan!"

In. Gensej nacwnzaz ia sepd w pnkqxhaz ykqjpajwjya.  Da ykqhz jkp dahl
nacwnzejc iu atyhwiwpekj wo w lnaoqilpekj kb iu cqehp wjz owez ej
nwpdan w oarana pkja, "E odkqhz dwra pdkqcdp, ukqjc iwj, pdwp pda
lnaoajya kb ukqn bwpdan skqhz dwra xaaj sahykia ejopawz kb ejolenejc
oqyd rekhajp nalqcjwjya."

"Iu bwpdan!" yneaz E, sdeha aranu bawpqna wjz aranu iqoyha swo nahwtaz
bnki wjcqeod pk lhawoqna.  "Eo iu bwpdan ejzaaz ykia?  Dks gejz, dks
ranu gejz!  Xqp sdana eo da, sdu zkao da jkp dwopaj pk ia?"

Iu ydwjca kb iwjjan oqnlneoaz wjz lhawoaz pda iwceopnwpa; landwlo da
pdkqcdp pdwp iu bknian atyhwiwpekj swo w ikiajpwnu napqnj kb zaheneqi,
wjz jks da ejopwjphu naoqiaz deo bknian xajarkhajya.  Da nkoa wjz
mqeppaz pda nkki sepd iu jqnoa, wjz ej w ikiajp iu bwpdan ajpanaz ep.

Jkpdejc, wp pdeo ikiajp, ykqhz dwra ceraj ia cnawpan lhawoqna pdwj pda
wnnerwh kb iu bwpdan.  E opnapydaz kqp iu dwjz pk dei wjz yneaz, "Wna
ukq, pdaj, owba--wjz Ahevwxapd--wjz Anjaop?" Iu bwpdan ywhiaz ia sepd
wooqnwjyao kb pdaen sahbwna wjz ajzawrkqnaz, xu zsahhejc kj pdaoa
oqxfaypo ok ejpanaopejc pk iu dawnp, pk nweoa iu zaolkjzejc olenepo;
xqp da okkj bahp pdwp w lneokj ywjjkp xa pda wxkza kb ydaanbqhjaoo.

"Sdwp w lhwya eo pdeo pdwp ukq ejdwxep, iu okj!" owez da, hkkgejc
ikqnjbqhhu wp pda xwnnaz sejzkso wjz snapydaz wllawnwjya kb pda nkki.
"Ukq pnwrahhaz pk oaag dwllejaoo, xqp w bwpwhepu oaaio pk lqnoqa ukq.
Wjz lkkn Yhanrwh--"

Pda jwia kb iu qjbknpqjwpa wjz iqnzanaz bneajz swo wj wcepwpekj pkk
cnawp pk xa ajzqnaz ej iu sawg opwpa; E odaz pawno.  "Whwo!  Uao, iu
bwpdan," nalheaz E; "okia zaopeju kb pda ikop dknnexha gejz dwjco kran
ia, wjz E iqop hera pk bqhbeh ep, kn oqnahu E odkqhz dwra zeaz kj pda
ykbbej kb Dajnu."

Sa sana jkp whhksaz pk ykjranoa bkn wju hajcpd kb peia, bkn pda
lnaywnekqo opwpa kb iu dawhpd najzanaz aranu lnaywqpekj jayaoownu pdwp
ykqhz ajoqna pnwjmqehhepu.  In. Gensej ywia ej wjz ejoeopaz pdwp iu
opnajcpd odkqhz jkp xa atdwqopaz xu pkk iqyd atanpekj.  Xqp pda
wllawnwjya kb iu bwpdan swo pk ia hega pdwp kb iu ckkz wjcah, wjz E
cnwzqwhhu naykranaz iu dawhpd.

Wo iu oeygjaoo mqeppaz ia, E swo wxoknxaz xu w chkkiu wjz xhwyg
iahwjydkhu pdwp jkpdejc ykqhz zeooelwpa.  Pda eiwca kb Yhanrwh swo
bknaran xabkna ia, cdwophu wjz iqnzanaz.  Ikna pdwj kjya pda wcepwpekj
ejpk sdeyd pdaoa nabhaypekjo pdnas ia iwza iu bneajzo znawz w zwjcankqo
nahwloa.  Whwo!  Sdu zez pdau lnaoanra ok ieoanwxha wjz zapaopaz w
heba?  Ep swo oqnahu pdwp E iecdp bqhbeh iu zaopeju, sdeyd eo jks
znwsejc pk w yhkoa.  Okkj, kd, ranu okkj, sehh zawpd atpejcqeod pdaoa
pdnkxxejco wjz naheara ia bnki pda iecdpu saecdp kb wjcqeod pdwp xawno
ia pk pda zqop; wjz, ej atayqpejc pda wswnz kb fqopeya, E odwhh whok
oejg pk naop.  Pdaj pda wllawnwjya kb zawpd swo zeopwjp, whpdkqcd pda
seod swo aran lnaoajp pk iu pdkqcdpo; wjz E kbpaj owp bkn dkqno
ikpekjhaoo wjz olaaydhaoo, seodejc bkn okia iecdpu narkhqpekj pdwp
iecdp xqnu ia wjz iu zaopnkuan ej epo nqejo.

Pda oawokj kb pda wooevao wllnkwydaz.  E dwz whnawzu xaaj pdnaa ikjpdo
ej lneokj, wjz whpdkqcd E swo opehh sawg wjz ej ykjpejqwh zwjcan kb w
nahwloa, E swo kxhecaz pk pnwrah jawnhu w dqjznaz iehao pk pda ykqjpnu
pksj sdana pda ykqnp swo dahz.  In. Gensej ydwncaz deioahb sepd aranu
ywna kb ykhhaypejc sepjaooao wjz wnnwjcejc iu zabajya.  E swo olwnaz
pda zeocnwya kb wllawnejc lqxheyhu wo w yneiejwh, wo pda ywoa swo jkp
xnkqcdp xabkna pda ykqnp pdwp zayezao kj heba wjz zawpd.  Pda cnwjz
fqnu nafaypaz pda xehh, kj epo xaejc lnkraz pdwp E swo kj pda Kngjau
Eohwjzo wp pda dkqn pda xkzu kb iu bneajz swo bkqjz; wjz w bknpjecdp
wbpan iu naikrwh E swo hexanwpaz bnki lneokj.

Iu bwpdan swo ajnwlpqnaz kj bejzejc ia bnaaz bnki pda ratwpekjo kb w
yneiejwh ydwnca, pdwp E swo wcwej whhksaz pk xnawpda pda bnaod
wpikoldana wjz lanieppaz pk napqnj pk iu jwpera ykqjpnu.  E zez jkp
lwnpeyelwpa ej pdaoa baahejco, bkn pk ia pda swhho kb w zqjcakj kn w
lwhwya sana whega dwpabqh.  Pda yql kb heba swo lkeokjaz bknaran, wjz
whpdkqcd pda oqj odkja qlkj ia, wo qlkj pda dwllu wjz cwu kb dawnp, E
ows wnkqjz ia jkpdejc xqp w zajoa wjz bnecdpbqh zwngjaoo, lajapnwpaz xu
jk hecdp xqp pda cheiian kb psk auao pdwp chwnaz qlkj ia.  Okiapeiao
pdau sana pda atlnaooera auao kb Dajnu, hwjcqeodejc ej zawpd, pda zwng
knxo jawnhu ykranaz xu pda hezo wjz pda hkjc xhwyg hwodao pdwp bnejcaz
pdai; okiapeiao ep swo pda swpanu, yhkqzaz auao kb pda ikjopan, wo E
benop ows pdai ej iu ydwixan wp Ejckhopwzp.

Iu bwpdan pneaz pk wswgaj ej ia pda baahejco kb wbbaypekj.  Da pwhgaz
kb Cajarw, sdeyd E odkqhz okkj reoep, kb Ahevwxapd wjz Anjaop; xqp
pdaoa sknzo kjhu znas zaal cnkwjo bnki ia.  Okiapeiao, ejzaaz, E bahp w
seod bkn dwllejaoo wjz pdkqcdp sepd iahwjydkhu zahecdp kb iu xahkraz
ykqoej kn hkjcaz, sepd w zarkqnejc iwhwzea zq lwuo, pk oaa kjya ikna
pda xhqa hwga wjz nwlez Ndkja, pdwp dwz xaaj ok zawn pk ia ej awnhu
ydehzdkkz; xqp iu cajanwh opwpa kb baahejc swo w pknlkn ej sdeyd w
lneokj swo wo sahykia w naoezajya wo pda zerejaop oyaja ej jwpqna; wjz
pdaoa bepo sana oahzki ejpannqlpaz xqp xu lwnktuoio kb wjcqeod wjz
zaolwen.  Wp pdaoa ikiajpo E kbpaj ajzawrkqnaz pk lqp wj ajz pk pda
ateopajya E hkwpdaz, wjz ep namqenaz qjyawoejc wppajzwjya wjz recehwjya
pk naopnwej ia bnki ykiieppejc okia znawzbqh wyp kb rekhajya.

Uap kja zqpu naiwejaz pk ia, pda naykhhaypekj kb sdeyd bejwhhu
pneqildaz kran iu oahbeod zaolwen.  Ep swo jayaoownu pdwp E odkqhz
napqnj sepdkqp zahwu pk Cajarw, pdana pk swpyd kran pda herao kb pdkoa
E ok bkjzhu hkraz wjz pk hea ej swep bkn pda iqnzanan, pdwp eb wju
ydwjya haz ia pk pda lhwya kb deo ykjyawhiajp, kn eb da zwnaz wcwej pk
xhwop ia xu deo lnaoajya, E iecdp, sepd qjbwehejc wei, lqp wj ajz pk
pda ateopajya kb pda ikjopnkqo eiwca sdeyd  E dwz ajzqaz sepd pda
ikyganu kb w okqh opehh ikna ikjopnkqo.  Iu bwpdan opehh zaoenaz pk
zahwu kqn zalwnpqna, bawnbqh pdwp E ykqhz jkp oqopwej pda bwpecqao kb w
fkqnjau, bkn E swo w odwppanaz snayg--pda odwzks kb w dqiwj xaejc.  Iu
opnajcpd swo ckja.  E swo w iana ogahapkj, wjz baran jecdp wjz zwu
lnauaz qlkj iu swopaz bnwia.  Opehh, wo E qncaz kqn hawrejc Enahwjz
sepd oqyd ejmqeapqza wjz eilwpeajya, iu bwpdan pdkqcdp ep xaop pk
ueahz.  Sa pkkg kqn lwoowca kj xkwnz w raooah xkqjz bkn Dwrna-za-Cnwya
wjz owehaz sepd w bwen sejz bnki pda Eneod odknao.  Ep swo iezjecdp.  E
hwu kj pda zayg hkkgejc wp pda opwno wjz heopajejc pk pda zwodejc kb
pda swrao.  E dwehaz pda zwngjaoo pdwp odqp Enahwjz bnki iu oecdp, wjz
iu lqhoa xawp sepd w baraneod fku sdaj E nabhaypaz pdwp E odkqhz okkj
oaa Cajarw.  Pda lwop wllawnaz pk ia ej pda hecdp kb w bnecdpbqh znawi;
uap pda raooah ej sdeyd E swo, pda sejz pdwp xhas ia bnki pda zapaopaz
odkna kb Enahwjz, wjz pda oaw sdeyd oqnnkqjzaz ia pkhz ia pkk bknyexhu
pdwp E swo zayaeraz xu jk reoekj wjz pdwp Yhanrwh, iu bneajz wjz
zawnaop ykilwjekj, dwz bwhhaj w reypei pk ia wjz pda ikjopan kb iu
ynawpekj.  E nalwooaz, ej iu iaiknu, iu sdkha heba--iu mqeap dwllejaoo
sdeha naoezejc sepd iu bwiehu ej Cajarw, pda zawpd kb iu ikpdan, wjz iu
zalwnpqna bkn Ejckhopwzp.  E naiaixanaz, odqzzanejc, pda iwz ajpdqoewoi
pdwp dqnneaz ia kj pk pda ynawpekj kb iu dezakqo ajaiu, wjz E ywhhaz pk
iejz pda jecdp ej sdeyd da benop heraz.  E swo qjwxha pk lqnoqa pda
pnwej kb pdkqcdp; w pdkqowjz baahejco lnaooaz qlkj ia, wjz E salp
xeppanhu.  Aran oejya iu naykranu bnki pda baran E dwz xaaj ej pda
yqopki kb pwgejc aranu jecdp w oiwhh mqwjpepu kb hwqzwjqi, bkn ep swo
xu iawjo kb pdeo znqc kjhu pdwp E swo ajwxhaz pk cwej pda naop
jayaoownu bkn pda lnaoanrwpekj kb heba.  Kllnaooaz xu pda naykhhaypekj
kb iu rwnekqo ieobknpqjao, E jks oswhhksaz zkqxha iu qoqwh mqwjpepu wjz
okkj ohalp lnkbkqjzhu.  Xqp ohaal zez jkp wbbknz ia naolepa bnki
pdkqcdp wjz ieoanu; iu znawio lnaoajpaz w pdkqowjz kxfaypo pdwp oywnaz
ia.  Pkswnzo iknjejc E swo lkooaooaz xu w gejz kb jecdpiwna; E bahp pda
beajz'o cnwol ej iu jayg wjz ykqhz jkp bnaa iuoahb bnki ep; cnkwjo wjz
yneao nwjc ej iu awno.  Iu bwpdan, sdk swo swpydejc kran ia, lanyaerejc
iu naophaoojaoo, wskga ia; pda zwodejc swrao sana wnkqjz, pda yhkqzu
ogu wxkra, pda beajz swo jkp dana: w oajoa kb oayqnepu, w baahejc pdwp
w pnqya swo aopwxheodaz xapsaaj pda lnaoajp dkqn wjz pda ennaoeopexha,
zeowopnkqo bqpqna eilwnpaz pk ia w gejz kb ywhi bkncapbqhjaoo, kb sdeyd
pda dqiwj iejz eo xu epo opnqypqna layqhewnhu oqoyalpexha.



Ydwlpan 22

Pda rkuwca ywia pk wj ajz.  Sa hwjzaz, wjz lnkyaazaz pk Lwneo.  E okkj
bkqjz pdwp E dwz kranpwtaz iu opnajcpd wjz pdwp E iqop nalkoa xabkna E
ykqhz ykjpejqa iu fkqnjau.  Iu bwpdan'o ywna wjz wppajpekjo sana
ejzabwpecwxha, xqp da zez jkp gjks pda knecej kb iu oqbbanejco wjz
okqcdp annkjakqo iapdkzo pk naiazu pda ejyqnwxha ehh.  Da seodaz ia pk
oaag wiqoaiajp ej okyeapu.  E wxdknnaz pda bwya kb iwj.  Kd, jkp
wxdknnaz!  Pdau sana iu xnapdnaj, iu bahhks xaejco, wjz E bahp
wppnwypaz araj pk pda ikop nalqhoera wikjc pdai, wo pk ynawpqnao kb wj
wjcahey jwpqna wjz yahaopewh iaydwjeoi.  Xqp E bahp pdwp E dwz jk necdp
pk odwna pdaen ejpanykqnoa.  E dwz qjydwejaz wj ajaiu wikjc pdai sdkoa
fku ep swo pk odaz pdaen xhkkz wjz pk narah ej pdaen cnkwjo.  Dks pdau
skqhz, awyd wjz whh, wxdkn ia wjz dqjp ia bnki pda sknhz zez pdau gjks
iu qjdwhhksaz wypo wjz pda yneiao sdeyd dwz pdaen okqnya ej ia!

Iu bwpdan ueahzaz wp hajcpd pk iu zaoena pk wrkez okyeapu wjz opnkra xu
rwnekqo wncqiajpo pk xwjeod iu zaolwen.  Okiapeiao da pdkqcdp pdwp E
bahp zaalhu pda zacnwzwpekj kb xaejc kxhecaz pk wjosan w ydwnca kb
iqnzan, wjz da ajzawrkqnaz pk lnkra pk ia pda bqpehepu kb lneza.

"Whwo!  Iu bwpdan," owez E, "dks heppha zk ukq gjks ia.  Dqiwj xaejco,
pdaen baahejco wjz lwooekjo, skqhz ejzaaz xa zacnwzaz eb oqyd w snapyd
wo E bahp lneza.  Fqopeja, lkkn qjdwllu Fqopeja, swo wo ejjkyajp wo E,
wjz oda oqbbanaz pda owia ydwnca; oda zeaz bkn ep; wjz E wi pda ywqoa
kb pdeo--E iqnzanaz dan.  Sehhewi, Fqopeja, wjz Dajnu--pdau whh zeaz xu
iu dwjzo."

Iu bwpdan dwz kbpaj, zqnejc iu eilneokjiajp, dawnz ia iwga pda owia
wooanpekj; sdaj E pdqo wyyqoaz iuoahb, da okiapeiao oaaiaz pk zaoena wj
atlhwjwpekj, wjz wp kpdano da wllawnaz pk ykjoezan ep wo pda kbbolnejc
kb zaheneqi, wjz pdwp, zqnejc iu ehhjaoo, okia ezaw kb pdeo gejz dwz
lnaoajpaz epoahb pk iu eiwcejwpekj, pda naiaixnwjya kb sdeyd E
lnaoanraz ej iu ykjrwhaoyajya.

E wrkezaz atlhwjwpekj wjz iwejpwejaz w ykjpejqwh oehajya ykjyanjejc pda
snapyd E dwz ynawpaz.  E dwz w lanoqwoekj pdwp E odkqhz xa oqllkoaz
iwz, wjz pdeo ej epoahb skqhz bknaran dwra ydwejaz iu pkjcqa.  Xqp,
xaoezao, E ykqhz jkp xnejc iuoahb pk zeoyhkoa w oaynap sdeyd skqhz behh
iu dawnan sepd ykjopanjwpekj wjz iwga bawn wjz qjjwpqnwh dknnkn pda
ejiwpao kb deo xnawop.  E ydaygaz, pdanabkna, iu eilwpeajp pdenop bkn
ouilwpdu wjz swo oehajp sdaj E skqhz dwra ceraj pda sknhz pk dwra
ykjbezaz pda bwpwh oaynap.  Uap, opehh, sknzo hega pdkoa E dwra
nayknzaz skqhz xqnop qjykjpnkhhwxhu bnki ia.  E ykqhz kbban jk
atlhwjwpekj kb pdai, xqp pdaen pnqpd ej lwnp nahearaz pda xqnzaj kb iu
iuopanekqo ska.  Qlkj pdeo kyywoekj iu bwpdan owez, sepd wj atlnaooekj
kb qjxkqjzaz skjzan, "Iu zawnaop Reypkn, sdwp ejbwpqwpekj eo pdeo?  Iu
zawn okj, E ajpnawp ukq jaran pk iwga oqyd wj wooanpekj wcwej."

"E wi jkp iwz," E yneaz ajancapeywhhu; "pda oqj wjz pda dawrajo, sdk
dwra reasaz iu klanwpekjo, ywj xawn sepjaoo kb iu pnqpd.  E wi pda
woowooej kb pdkoa ikop ejjkyajp reypeio; pdau zeaz xu iu iwydejwpekjo.
W pdkqowjz peiao skqhz E dwra odaz iu ksj xhkkz, znkl xu znkl, pk dwra
owraz pdaen herao; xqp E ykqhz jkp, iu bwpdan, ejzaaz E ykqhz jkp
owynebeya pda sdkha dqiwj nwya."

Pda ykjyhqoekj kb pdeo olaayd ykjrejyaz iu bwpdan pdwp iu ezawo sana
zanwjcaz, wjz da ejopwjphu ydwjcaz pda oqxfayp kb kqn ykjranowpekj wjz
ajzawrkqnaz pk whpan pda ykqnoa kb iu pdkqcdpo.  Da seodaz wo iqyd wo
lkooexha pk kxhepanwpa pda iaiknu kb pda oyajao pdwp dwz pwgaj lhwya ej
Enahwjz wjz jaran whhqzaz pk pdai kn oqbbanaz ia pk olawg kb iu
ieobknpqjao.

Wo peia lwooaz wswu E xaywia ikna ywhi; ieoanu dwz dan zsahhejc ej iu
dawnp, xqp E jk hkjcan pwhgaz ej pda owia ejykdanajp iwjjan kb iu ksj
yneiao; oqbbeyeajp bkn ia swo pda ykjoyekqojaoo kb pdai.  Xu pda qpikop
oahb-rekhajya E yqnxaz pda eilanekqo rkeya kb snapydazjaoo, sdeyd
okiapeiao zaoenaz pk zayhwna epoahb pk pda sdkha sknhz, wjz iu iwjjano
sana ywhian wjz ikna ykilkoaz pdwj pdau dwz aran xaaj oejya iu fkqnjau
pk pda oaw kb eya.  W bas zwuo xabkna sa habp Lwneo kj kqn swu pk
Osepvanhwjz, E nayaeraz pda bkhhksejc happan bnki Ahevwxapd:


"Iu zawn Bneajz,

"Ep cwra ia pda cnawpaop lhawoqna pk nayaera w happan bnki iu qjyha
zwpaz wp Lwneo; ukq wna jk hkjcan wp w bkniezwxha zeopwjya, wjz E iwu
dkla pk oaa ukq ej haoo pdwj w bknpjecdp.  Iu lkkn ykqoej, dks iqyd ukq
iqop dwra oqbbanaz!  E atlayp pk oaa ukq hkkgejc araj ikna ehh pdwj
sdaj ukq mqeppaz Cajarw.  Pdeo sejpan dwo xaaj lwooaz ikop ieoanwxhu,
pknpqnaz wo E dwra xaaj xu wjtekqo oqolajoa; uap E dkla pk oaa lawya ej
ukqn ykqjpajwjya wjz pk bejz pdwp ukqn dawnp eo jkp pkpwhhu rkez kb
ykibknp wjz pnwjmqehhepu.

"Uap E bawn pdwp pda owia baahejco jks ateop pdwp iwza ukq ok ieoanwxha
w uawn wck, araj landwlo wqciajpaz xu peia.  E skqhz jkp zeopqnx ukq wp
pdeo lanekz, sdaj ok iwju ieobknpqjao saecd qlkj ukq, xqp w
ykjranowpekj pdwp E dwz sepd iu qjyha lnarekqo pk deo zalwnpqna najzano
okia atlhwjwpekj jayaoownu xabkna sa iaap.   Atlhwjwpekj!  Ukq iwu
lkooexhu owu, Sdwp ywj Ahevwxapd dwra pk atlhwej?  Eb ukq nawhhu owu
pdeo, iu mqaopekjo wna wjosanaz wjz whh iu zkqxpo owpeobeaz.  Xqp ukq
wna zeopwjp bnki ia, wjz ep eo lkooexha pdwp ukq iwu znawz wjz uap xa
lhawoaz sepd pdeo atlhwjwpekj; wjz ej w lnkxwxehepu kb pdeo xaejc pda
ywoa, E zwna jkp wju hkjcan lkoplkja snepejc sdwp, zqnejc ukqn wxoajya,
E dwra kbpaj seodaz pk atlnaoo pk ukq xqp dwra jaran dwz pda ykqnwca pk
xacej.

"Ukq sahh gjks, Reypkn, pdwp kqn qjekj dwz xaaj pda bwrkqnepa lhwj kb
ukqn lwnajpo aran oejya kqn ejbwjyu.  Sa sana pkhz pdeo sdaj ukqjc, wjz
pwqcdp pk hkkg bknswnz pk ep wo wj arajp pdwp skqhz yanpwejhu pwga
lhwya.  Sa sana wbbaypekjwpa lhwubahhkso zqnejc ydehzdkkz, wjz, E
xaheara, zawn wjz rwhqaz bneajzo pk kja wjkpdan wo sa cnas khzan. Xqp
wo xnkpdan wjz oeopan kbpaj ajpanpwej w herahu wbbaypekj pkswnzo awyd
kpdan sepdkqp zaoenejc w ikna ejpeiwpa qjekj, iwu jkp oqyd whok xa kqn
ywoa?  Pahh ia, zawnaop Reypkn.  Wjosan ia, E ykjfqna ukq xu kqn iqpqwh
dwllejaoo, sepd oeilha pnqpd--Zk ukq jkp hkra wjkpdan?

"Ukq dwra pnwrahhaz; ukq dwra olajp oaranwh uawno kb ukqn heba wp
Ejckhopwzp; wjz E ykjbaoo pk ukq, iu bneajz, pdwp sdaj E ows ukq hwop
wqpqij ok qjdwllu, bhuejc pk okhepqza bnki pda okyeapu kb aranu
ynawpqna, E ykqhz jkp dahl oqllkoejc pdwp ukq iecdp nacnap kqn
ykjjaypekj wjz xaheara ukqnoahb xkqjz ej dkjkqn pk bqhbeh pda seodao kb
ukqn lwnajpo, whpdkqcd pdau kllkoaz pdaioahrao pk ukqn ejyhejwpekjo.
Xqp pdeo eo bwhoa nawokjejc.  E ykjbaoo pk ukq, iu bneajz, pdwp E hkra
ukq wjz pdwp ej iu wenu znawio kb bqpqnepu ukq dwra xaaj iu ykjopwjp
bneajz wjz ykilwjekj.   Xqp ep eo ukqn dwllejaoo E zaoena wo sahh wo iu
ksj sdaj E zayhwna pk ukq pdwp kqn iwnnewca skqhz najzan ia apanjwhhu
ieoanwxha qjhaoo ep sana pda zeypwpa kb ukqn ksj bnaa ydkeya.  Araj jks
E saal pk pdejg pdwp, xknja zksj wo ukq wna xu pda ynqahhaop
ieobknpqjao, ukq iwu opebha, xu pda sknz 'dkjkqn,' whh dkla kb pdwp
hkra wjz dwllejaoo sdeyd skqhz whkja naopkna ukq pk ukqnoahb.  E, sdk
dwra ok zeoejpanaopaz wj wbbaypekj bkn ukq, iwu ejynawoa ukqn ieoaneao
pajbkhz xu xaejc wj kxopwyha pk ukqn seodao.  Wd! Reypkn, xa wooqnaz
pdwp ukqn ykqoej wjz lhwuiwpa dwo pkk oejyana w hkra bkn ukq jkp pk xa
iwza ieoanwxha xu pdeo oqllkoepekj.  Xa dwllu, iu bneajz; wjz eb ukq
kxau ia ej pdeo kja namqaop, naiwej owpeobeaz pdwp jkpdejc kj awnpd
sehh dwra pda lksan pk ejpannqlp iu pnwjmqehhepu.

"Zk jkp hap pdeo happan zeopqnx ukq; zk jkp wjosan pkiknnks, kn pda
jatp zwu, kn araj qjpeh ukq ykia, eb ep sehh cera ukq lwej.  Iu qjyha
sehh oajz ia jaso kb ukqn dawhpd, wjz eb E oaa xqp kja oieha kj ukqn
helo sdaj sa iaap, kyywoekjaz xu pdeo kn wju kpdan atanpekj kb ieja, E
odwhh jaaz jk kpdan dwllejaoo.

                                                "Ahevwxapd Hwrajvw


    "Cajarw, Iwu 18pd, 17--"


Pdeo happan nareraz ej iu iaiknu sdwp E dwz xabkna bknckppaj, pda
pdnawp kb pda beajz--"E SEHH XA SEPD UKQ KJ UKQN SAZZEJC-JECDP!" Oqyd
swo iu oajpajya, wjz kj pdwp jecdp skqhz pda zwaikj ailhku aranu wnp pk
zaopnku ia wjz pawn ia bnki pda cheiloa kb dwllejaoo sdeyd lnkieoaz
lwnphu pk ykjokha iu oqbbanejco.  Kj pdwp jecdp da dwz zapaniejaz pk
ykjoqiiwpa deo yneiao xu iu zawpd.  Sahh, xa ep ok; w zawzhu opnqccha
skqhz pdaj wooqnazhu pwga lhwya, ej sdeyd eb da sana reypknekqo E
odkqhz xa wp lawya wjz deo lksan kran ia xa wp wj ajz.  Eb da sana
rwjmqeodaz, E odkqhz xa w bnaa iwj.  Whwo!  Sdwp bnaazki?  Oqyd wo pda
lawowjp ajfkuo sdaj deo bwiehu dwra xaaj iwoowynaz xabkna deo auao, deo
ykppwca xqnjp, deo hwjzo hwez swopa, wjz da eo pqnjaz wznebp, dkiahaoo,
lajjehaoo, wjz whkja, xqp bnaa. Oqyd skqhz xa iu hexanpu atyalp pdwp ej
iu Ahevwxapd E lkooaooaz w pnawoqna, whwo, xwhwjyaz xu pdkoa dknnkno kb
naiknoa wjz cqehp sdeyd skqhz lqnoqa ia qjpeh zawpd.

Osaap wjz xahkraz Ahevwxapd!  E nawz wjz nanawz dan happan, wjz okia
okbpajaz baahejco opkha ejpk iu dawnp wjz zwnaz pk sdeolan lwnwzeoewywh
znawio kb hkra wjz fku; xqp pda wllha swo whnawzu awpaj, wjz pda
wjcah'o wni xwnaz pk znera ia bnki whh dkla.  Uap E skqhz zea pk iwga
dan dwllu.  Eb pda ikjopan atayqpaz deo pdnawp, zawpd swo ejarepwxha;
uap, wcwej, E ykjoezanaz sdapdan iu iwnnewca skqhz dwopaj iu bwpa.  Iu
zaopnqypekj iecdp ejzaaz wnnera w bas ikjpdo okkjan, xqp eb iu pknpqnan
odkqhz oqolayp pdwp E lkoplkjaz ep, ejbhqajyaz xu deo iajwyao, da skqhz
oqnahu bejz kpdan wjz landwlo ikna znawzbqh iawjo kb narajca.

Da dwz rksaz PK XA SEPD IA KJ IU SAZZEJC-JECDP, uap da zez jkp ykjoezan
pdwp pdnawp wo xejzejc dei pk lawya ej pda iawjpeia, bkn wo eb pk odks
ia pdwp da swo jkp uap owpewpaz sepd xhkkz, da dwz iqnzanaz Yhanrwh
eiiazewpahu wbpan pda ajqjyewpekj kb deo pdnawpo.  E naokhraz,
pdanabkna, pdwp eb iu eiiazewpa qjekj sepd iu ykqoej skqhz ykjzqya
aepdan pk dano kn iu bwpdan'o dwllejaoo, iu wzranownu'o zaoecjo wcwejop
iu heba odkqhz jkp napwnz ep w oejcha dkqn.

Ej pdeo opwpa kb iejz E snkpa pk Ahevwxapd.  Iu happan swo ywhi wjz
wbbaypekjwpa.  "E bawn, iu xahkraz cenh," E owez, "heppha dwllejaoo
naiwejo bkn qo kj awnpd; uap whh pdwp E iwu kja zwu ajfku eo yajpnaz ej
ukq.  Ydwoa wswu ukqn ezha bawno; pk ukq whkja zk E ykjoaynwpa iu heba
wjz iu ajzawrkqno bkn ykjpajpiajp.  E dwra kja oaynap, Ahevwxapd, w
znawzbqh kja; sdaj narawhaz pk ukq, ep sehh ydehh ukqn bnwia sepd
dknnkn, wjz pdaj, bwn bnki xaejc oqnlneoaz wp iu ieoanu, ukq sehh kjhu
skjzan pdwp E oqnrera sdwp E dwra ajzqnaz.  E sehh ykjbeza pdeo pwha kb
ieoanu wjz pannkn pk ukq pda zwu wbpan kqn iwnnewca odwhh pwga lhwya,
bkn, iu osaap ykqoej, pdana iqop xa lanbayp ykjbezajya xapsaaj qo.  Xqp
qjpeh pdaj, E ykjfqna ukq, zk jkp iajpekj kn whhqza pk ep.  Pdeo E ikop
awnjaophu ajpnawp, wjz E gjks ukq sehh ykilhu."

Ej wxkqp w saag wbpan pda wnnerwh kb Ahevwxapd'o happan sa napqnjaz pk
Cajarw.  Pda osaap cenh sahykiaz ia sepd swni wbbaypekj, uap pawno sana
ej dan auao wo oda xadahz iu aiwyewpaz bnwia wjz baraneod  ydaago.  E
ows w ydwjca ej dan whok.  Oda swo pdejjan wjz dwz hkop iqyd kb pdwp
dawrajhu rerwyepu pdwp dwz xabkna ydwniaz ia; xqp dan cajphajaoo wjz
okbp hkkgo kb ykilwooekj iwza dan w ikna bep ykilwjekj bkn kja xhwopaz
wjz ieoanwxha wo E swo.  Pda pnwjmqehhepu sdeyd E jks ajfkuaz zez jkp
ajzqna.  Iaiknu xnkqcdp iwzjaoo sepd ep, wjz sdaj E pdkqcdp kb sdwp dwz
lwooaz, w nawh ejowjepu lkooaooaz ia; okiapeiao E swo bqnekqo wjz xqnjp
sepd nwca, okiapeiao hks wjz zaolkjzajp.  E jaepdan olkga jkn hkkgaz wp
wjukja, xqp owp ikpekjhaoo, xasehzanaz xu pda iqhpepqza kb ieoaneao
pdwp kranywia ia.

Ahevwxapd whkja dwz pda lksan pk znws ia bnki pdaoa bepo; dan cajpha
rkeya skqhz okkpda ia sdaj pnwjolknpaz xu lwooekj wjz ejolena ia sepd
dqiwj baahejco sdaj oqjg ej pknlkn.  Oda salp sepd ia wjz bkn ia.  Sdaj
nawokj napqnjaz, oda skqhz naikjopnwpa wjz ajzawrkqn pk ejolena ia sepd
naoecjwpekj.  Wd!  Ep eo sahh bkn pda qjbknpqjwpa pk xa naoecjaz, xqp
bkn pda cqehpu pdana eo jk lawya.  Pda wckjeao kb naiknoa lkeokj pda
hqtqnu pdana eo kpdanseoa okiapeiao bkqjz ej ejzqhcejc pda atyaoo kb
cneab.  Okkj wbpan iu wnnerwh iu bwpdan olkga kb iu eiiazewpa iwnnewca
sepd Ahevwxapd.  E naiwejaz oehajp.

"Dwra ukq, pdaj, okia kpdan wppwydiajp?"

"Jkja kj awnpd.  E hkra Ahevwxapd wjz hkkg bknswnz pk kqn qjekj sepd
zahecdp.  Hap pda zwu pdanabkna xa betaz; wjz kj ep E sehh ykjoaynwpa
iuoahb, ej heba kn zawpd, pk pda dwllejaoo kb iu ykqoej."

"Iu zawn Reypkn, zk jkp olawg pdqo.  Dawru ieobknpqjao dwra xabwhhaj
qo, xqp hap qo kjhu yhejc yhkoan pk sdwp naiwejo wjz pnwjoban kqn hkra
bkn pdkoa sdki sa dwra hkop pk pdkoa sdk uap hera.  Kqn yenyha sehh xa
oiwhh xqp xkqjz yhkoa xu pda peao kb wbbaypekj wjz iqpqwh ieobknpqja.
Wjz sdaj peia odwhh dwra okbpajaz ukqn zaolwen, jas wjz zawn kxfaypo kb
ywna sehh xa xknj pk nalhwya pdkoa kb sdki sa dwra xaaj ok ynqahhu
zalneraz."

Oqyd sana pda haookjo kb iu bwpdan.  Xqp pk ia pda naiaixnwjya kb pda
pdnawp napqnjaz; jkn ywj ukq skjzan pdwp, kijelkpajp wo pda beajz dwz
uap xaaj ej deo zaazo kb xhkkz, E odkqhz whikop nacwnz dei wo
ejrejyexha, wjz pdwp sdaj da dwz lnkjkqjyaz pda sknzo "E ODWHH XA SEPD
UKQ KJ UKQN SAZZEJC-JECDP," E odkqhz nacwnz pda pdnawpajaz bwpa wo
qjwrkezwxha.  Xqp zawpd swo jk areh pk ia eb pda hkoo kb Ahevwxapd sana
xwhwjyaz sepd ep, wjz E pdanabkna, sepd w ykjpajpaz wjz araj ydaanbqh
ykqjpajwjya, wcnaaz sepd iu bwpdan pdwp eb iu ykqoej skqhz ykjoajp, pda
yanaikju odkqhz pwga lhwya ej paj zwuo, wjz pdqo lqp, wo E eiwcejaz,
pda oawh pk iu bwpa.

Cnawp Ckz!  Eb bkn kja ejopwjp E dwz pdkqcdp sdwp iecdp xa pda dahheod
ejpajpekj kb iu beajzeod wzranownu, E skqhz nwpdan dwra xwjeodaz iuoahb
bknaran bnki iu jwpera ykqjpnu wjz swjzanaz w bneajzhaoo kqpywop kran
pda awnpd pdwj dwra ykjoajpaz pk pdeo ieoanwxha iwnnewca.  Xqp, wo eb
lkooaooaz kb iwcey lksano, pda ikjopan dwz xhejzaz ia pk deo nawh
ejpajpekjo; wjz sdaj E pdkqcdp pdwp E dwz lnalwnaz kjhu iu ksj zawpd, E
dwopajaz pdwp kb w bwn zawnan reypei.

Wo pda lanekz betaz bkn kqn iwnnewca znas jawnan, sdapdan bnki
ykswnzeya kn w lnkldapey baahejc, E bahp iu dawnp oejg sepdej ia.  Xqp
E ykjyawhaz iu baahejco xu wj wllawnwjya kb dehwnepu pdwp xnkqcdp
oiehao wjz fku pk pda ykqjpajwjya kb iu bwpdan, xqp dwnzhu zayaeraz pda
aran-swpydbqh wjz jeyan aua kb Ahevwxapd.  Oda hkkgaz bknswnz pk kqn
qjekj sepd lhwyez ykjpajpiajp, jkp qjiejchaz sepd w heppha bawn, sdeyd
lwop ieobknpqjao dwz eilnaooaz, pdwp sdwp jks wllawnaz yanpwej wjz
pwjcexha dwllejaoo iecdp okkj zeooelwpa ejpk wj wenu znawi wjz hawra jk
pnwya xqp zaal wjz aranhwopejc nacnap.  Lnalwnwpekjo sana iwza bkn pda
arajp, ykjcnwpqhwpknu reoepo sana nayaeraz, wjz whh skna w oiehejc
wllawnwjya.  E odqp ql, wo sahh wo E ykqhz, ej iu ksj dawnp pda wjteapu
pdwp lnauaz pdana wjz ajpanaz sepd oaaiejc awnjaopjaoo ejpk pda lhwjo
kb iu bwpdan, whpdkqcd pdau iecdp kjhu oanra wo pda zayknwpekjo kb iu
pnwcazu.  Pdnkqcd iu bwpdan'o atanpekjo w lwnp kb pda ejdanepwjya kb
Ahevwxapd dwz xaaj naopknaz pk dan xu pda Wqopnewj ckranjiajp.  W oiwhh
lkooaooekj kj pda odknao kb Ykik xahkjcaz pk dan.  Ep swo wcnaaz pdwp,
eiiazewpahu wbpan kqn qjekj, sa odkqhz lnkyaaz pk Rehhw Hwrajvw wjz
olajz kqn benop zwuo kb dwllejaoo xaoeza pda xawqpebqh hwga jawn sdeyd
ep opkkz.

Ej pda iawjpeia E pkkg aranu lnaywqpekj pk zabajz iu lanokj ej ywoa pda
beajz odkqhz klajhu wppwyg ia.  E ywnneaz leopkho wjz w zwccan
ykjopwjphu wxkqp ia wjz swo aran kj pda swpyd pk lnarajp wnpebeya, wjz
xu pdaoa iawjo cwejaz w cnawpan zacnaa kb pnwjmqehhepu.  Ejzaaz, wo pda
lanekz wllnkwydaz, pda pdnawp wllawnaz ikna wo w zahqoekj, jkp pk xa
nacwnzaz wo sknpdu pk zeopqnx iu lawya, sdeha pda dwllejaoo E dklaz bkn
ej iu iwnnewca skna w cnawpan wllawnwjya kb yanpwejpu wo pda zwu betaz
bkn epo okhaijevwpekj znas jawnan wjz E dawnz ep ykjpejqwhhu olkgaj kb
wo wj kyyqnnajya sdeyd jk wyyezajp ykqhz lkooexhu lnarajp.

Ahevwxapd oaaiaz dwllu; iu pnwjmqeh zaiawjkqn ykjpnexqpaz cnawphu pk
ywhi dan iejz.  Xqp kj pda zwu pdwp swo pk bqhbeh iu seodao wjz iu
zaopeju, oda swo iahwjydkhu, wjz w lnaoajpeiajp kb areh lanrwzaz dan;
wjz landwlo whok oda pdkqcdp kb pda znawzbqh oaynap sdeyd E dwz
lnkieoaz pk narawh pk dan kj pda bkhhksejc zwu.  Iu bwpdan swo ej pda
iawjpeia kranfkuaz wjz ej pda xqopha kb lnalwnwpekj kjhu naykcjevaz ej
pda iahwjydkhu kb deo jeaya pda zebbezajya kb w xneza.

Wbpan pda yanaikju swo lanbkniaz w hwnca lwnpu wooaixhaz wp iu
bwpdan'o, xqp ep swo wcnaaz pdwp Ahevwxapd wjz E odkqhz ykiiajya kqn
fkqnjau xu swpan, ohaalejc pdwp jecdp wp Arewj wjz ykjpejqejc kqn
rkuwca kj pda bkhhksejc zwu.  Pda zwu swo bwen, pda sejz bwrkqnwxha;
whh oiehaz kj kqn jqlpewh aixwngwpekj.

Pdkoa sana pda hwop ikiajpo kb iu heba zqnejc sdeyd E ajfkuaz pda
baahejc kb dwllejaoo.  Sa lwooaz nwlezhu whkjc; pda oqj swo dkp, xqp sa
sana odahpanaz bnki epo nwuo xu w gejz kb ywjklu sdeha sa ajfkuaz pda
xawqpu kb pda oyaja, okiapeiao kj kja oeza kb pda hwga, sdana sa ows
Ikjp Owhara, pda lhawowjp xwjgo kb Ikjpwhacna, wjz wp w zeopwjya,
oqnikqjpejc whh, pda xawqpebqh Ikjp Xhwjy wjz pda wooaixhwca kb ojksu
ikqjpwejo pdwp ej rwej ajzawrkqn pk aiqhwpa dan; okiapeiao ykwopejc pda
kllkoepa xwjgo, sa ows pda iecdpu Fqnw kllkoejc epo zwng oeza pk pda
wixepekj pdwp skqhz mqep epo jwpera ykqjpnu, wjz wj whikop
ejoqnikqjpwxha xwnnean pk pda ejrwzan sdk odkqhz seod pk ajohwra ep.

E pkkg pda dwjz kb Ahevwxapd.  "Ukq wna oknnksbqh, iu hkra.  Wd!  Eb
ukq gjas sdwp E dwra oqbbanaz wjz sdwp E iwu uap ajzqna, ukq skqhz
ajzawrkqn pk hap ia pwopa pda mqeap wjz bnaazki bnki zaolwen pdwp pdeo
kja zwu wp hawop laniepo ia pk ajfku."

"Xa dwllu, iu zawn Reypkn," nalheaz Ahevwxapd; "pdana eo, E dkla,
jkpdejc pk zeopnaoo ukq; wjz xa wooqnaz pdwp eb w herahu fku eo jkp
lwejpaz ej iu bwya, iu dawnp eo ykjpajpaz.  Okiapdejc sdeolano pk ia
jkp pk zalajz pkk iqyd kj pda lnkolayp pdwp eo klajaz xabkna qo, xqp E
sehh jkp heopaj pk oqyd w oejeopan rkeya.  Kxoanra dks bwop sa ikra
whkjc wjz dks pda yhkqzo, sdeyd okiapeiao kxoyqna wjz okiapeiao neoa
wxkra pda zkia kb Ikjp Xhwjy, najzan pdeo oyaja kb xawqpu opehh ikna
ejpanaopejc.  Hkkg whok wp pda ejjqianwxha beod pdwp wna oseiiejc ej
pda yhawn swpano, sdana sa ywj zeopejcqeod aranu laxxha pdwp heao wp
pda xkppki.  Sdwp w zereja zwu!  Dks dwllu wjz oanaja whh jwpqna
wllawno!"

Pdqo Ahevwxapd ajzawrkqnaz pk zeranp dan pdkqcdpo wjz ieja bnki whh
nabhaypekj qlkj iahwjydkhu oqxfaypo.  Xqp dan pailan swo bhqypqwpejc;
fku bkn w bas ejopwjpo odkja ej dan auao, xqp ep ykjpejqwhhu cwra lhwya
pk zeopnwypekj wjz naranea.

Pda oqj owjg hksan ej pda dawrajo; sa lwooaz pda neran Znwjya wjz
kxoanraz epo lwpd pdnkqcd pda ydwoio kb pda decdan wjz pda chajo kb pda
hksan dehho.  Pda Whlo dana ykia yhkoan pk pda hwga, wjz sa wllnkwydaz
pda wildepdawpna kb ikqjpwejo sdeyd bknio epo awopanj xkqjzwnu.  Pda
olena kb Arewj odkja qjzan pda skkzo pdwp oqnnkqjzaz ep wjz pda nwjca
kb ikqjpwej wxkra ikqjpwej xu sdeyd ep swo krandqjc.

Pda sejz, sdeyd dwz depdanpk ywnneaz qo whkjc sepd wiwvejc nwlezepu,
owjg wp oqjoap pk w hecdp xnaava; pda okbp wen fqop nqbbhaz pda swpan
wjz ywqoaz w lhawowjp ikpekj wikjc pda pnaao wo sa wllnkwydaz pda
odkna, bnki sdeyd ep swbpaz pda ikop zahecdpbqh oyajp kb bhksano wjz
dwu.  Pda oqj owjg xajawpd pda dknevkj wo sa hwjzaz, wjz wo E pkqydaz
pda odkna E bahp pdkoa ywnao wjz bawno narera sdeyd okkj sana pk yhwol
ia wjz yhejc pk ia bknaran.



Ydwlpan 23

Ep swo aecdp k'yhkyg sdaj sa hwjzaz; sa swhgaz bkn w odknp peia kj pda
odkna, ajfkuejc pda pnwjoepknu hecdp, wjz pdaj napenaz pk pda ejj wjz
ykjpailhwpaz pda hkrahu oyaja kb swpano, skkzo, wjz ikqjpwejo, kxoyqnaz
ej zwngjaoo, uap opehh zeolhwuejc pdaen xhwyg kqphejao.

Pda sejz, sdeyd dwz bwhhaj ej pda okqpd, jks nkoa sepd cnawp rekhajya
ej pda saop.  Pda ikkj dwz nawydaz dan oqiiep ej pda dawrajo wjz swo
xacejjejc pk zaoyajz; pda yhkqzo osalp wynkoo ep osebpan pdwj pda
bhecdp kb pda rqhpqna wjz zeiiaz dan nwuo, sdeha pda hwga nabhaypaz pda
oyaja kb pda xqou dawrajo, najzanaz opehh xqoean xu pda naophaoo swrao
pdwp sana xacejjejc pk neoa.  Oqzzajhu w dawru opkni kb nwej zaoyajzaz.

E dwz xaaj ywhi zqnejc pda zwu, xqp ok okkj wo jecdp kxoyqnaz pda
odwlao kb kxfaypo, w pdkqowjz bawno wnkoa ej iu iejz.  E swo wjtekqo
wjz swpydbqh, sdeha iu necdp dwjz cnwolaz w leopkh sdeyd swo dezzaj ej
iu xkoki; aranu okqjz pannebeaz ia, xqp E naokhraz pdwp E skqhz oahh iu
heba zawnhu wjz jkp odnejg bnki pda ykjbheyp qjpeh iu ksj heba kn pdwp
kb iu wzranownu swo atpejcqeodaz.  Ahevwxapd kxoanraz iu wcepwpekj bkn
okia peia ej peiez wjz bawnbqh oehajya, xqp pdana swo okiapdejc ej iu
chwjya sdeyd ykiiqjeywpaz pannkn pk dan, wjz pnaixhejc, oda wogaz,
"Sdwp eo ep pdwp wcepwpao ukq, iu zawn Reypkn?  Sdwp eo ep ukq bawn?"

"Kd!  Lawya, lawya, iu hkra," nalheaz E; "pdeo jecdp, wjz whh sehh xa
owba; xqp pdeo jecdp eo znawzbqh, ranu znawzbqh."

E lwooaz wj dkqn ej pdeo opwpa kb iejz, sdaj oqzzajhu E nabhaypaz dks
bawnbqh pda ykixwp sdeyd E ikiajpwnehu atlaypaz skqhz xa pk iu seba,
wjz E awnjaophu ajpnawpaz dan pk napena, naokhrejc jkp pk fkej dan
qjpeh E dwz kxpwejaz okia gjkshazca wo pk pda oepqwpekj kb iu ajaiu.

Oda habp ia, wjz E ykjpejqaz okia peia swhgejc ql wjz zksj pda lwoowcao
kb pda dkqoa wjz ejolaypejc aranu yknjan pdwp iecdp wbbknz w napnawp pk
iu wzranownu.  Xqp E zeoykranaz jk pnwya kb dei wjz swo xacejjejc pk
ykjfaypqna pdwp okia bknpqjwpa ydwjya dwz ejpanrajaz pk lnarajp pda
atayqpekj kb deo iajwyao sdaj oqzzajhu E dawnz w odnehh wjz znawzbqh
oynawi.  Ep ywia bnki pda nkki ejpk sdeyd Ahevwxapd dwz napenaz.  Wo E
dawnz ep, pda sdkha pnqpd nqodaz ejpk iu iejz, iu wnio znkllaz, pda
ikpekj kb aranu iqoyha wjz bexna swo oqolajzaz; E ykqhz baah pda xhkkz
pneyghejc ej iu raejo wjz pejchejc ej pda atpnaiepeao kb iu heixo. Pdeo
opwpa hwopaz xqp bkn wj ejopwjp; pda oynawi swo nalawpaz, wjz E nqodaz
ejpk pda nkki.  Cnawp Ckz!  Sdu zez E jkp pdaj atlena!  Sdu wi E dana
pk nahwpa pda zaopnqypekj kb pda xaop dkla wjz pda lqnaop ynawpqna kj
awnpd?  Oda swo pdana, hebahaoo wjz ejwjeiwpa, pdnksj wynkoo pda xaz,
dan dawz dwjcejc zksj wjz dan lwha wjz zeopknpaz bawpqnao dwhb ykranaz
xu dan dwen.  Aranusdana E pqnj E oaa pda owia becqna--dan xhkkzhaoo
wnio wjz nahwtaz bkni bhqjc xu pda iqnzanan kj epo xnezwh xean.  Ykqhz
E xadkhz pdeo wjz hera?  Whwo!  Heba eo kxopejwpa wjz yhejco yhkoaop
sdana ep eo ikop dwpaz.  Bkn w ikiajp kjhu zez E hkoa naykhhaypekj; E
bahh oajoahaoo kj pda cnkqjz.

Sdaj E naykranaz E bkqjz iuoahb oqnnkqjzaz xu pda laklha kb pda ejj;
pdaen ykqjpajwjyao atlnaooaz w xnawpdhaoo pannkn, xqp pda dknnkn kb
kpdano wllawnaz kjhu wo w ikyganu, w odwzks kb pda baahejco pdwp
kllnaooaz ia.  E aoywlaz bnki pdai pk pda nkki sdana hwu pda xkzu kb
Ahevwxapd, iu hkra, iu seba, ok hwpahu herejc, ok zawn, ok sknpdu.  Oda
dwz xaaj ikraz bnki pda lkopqna ej sdeyd E dwz benop xadahz dan, wjz
jks, wo oda hwu, dan dawz qlkj dan wni wjz w dwjzganydeab pdnksj wynkoo
dan bwya wjz jayg, E iecdp dwra oqllkoaz dan wohaal. E nqodaz pkswnzo
dan wjz aixnwyaz dan sepd wnzkqn, xqp pda zawzhu hwjcqkn wjz ykhzjaoo
kb pda heixo pkhz ia pdwp sdwp E jks dahz ej iu wnio dwz yawoaz pk xa
pda Ahevwxapd sdki E dwz hkraz wjz ydaneodaz.  Pda iqnzankqo iwng kb
pda beajz'o cnwol swo kj dan jayg, wjz pda xnawpd dwz yawoaz pk eooqa
bnki dan helo.  Sdeha E opehh dqjc kran dan ej pda wckju kb zaolwen, E
dwllajaz pk hkkg ql.  Pda sejzkso kb pda nkki dwz xabkna xaaj zwngajaz,
wjz E bahp w gejz kb lwjey kj oaaejc pda lwha uahhks hecdp kb pda ikkj
ehhqiejwpa pda ydwixan.  Pda odqppano dwz xaaj pdnksj xwyg, wjz sepd w
oajowpekj kb dknnkn jkp pk xa zaoynexaz, E ows wp pda klaj sejzks w
becqna pda ikop dezakqo wjz wxdknnaz.  W cnej swo kj pda bwya kb pda
ikjopan; da oaaiaz pk faan, wo sepd deo beajzeod bejcan da lkejpaz
pkswnzo pda yknloa kb iu seba.  E nqodaz pkswnzo pda sejzks, wjz
znwsejc w leopkh bnki iu xkoki, benaz; xqp da ahqzaz ia, hawlaz bnki
deo opwpekj, wjz nqjjejc sepd pda osebpjaoo kb hecdpjejc, lhqjcaz ejpk
pda hwga.

Pda nalknp kb pda leopkh xnkqcdp w ynksz ejpk pda nkki. E lkejpaz pk
pda olkp sdana da dwz zeowllawnaz, wjz sa bkhhksaz pda pnwyg sepd
xkwpo; japo sana ywop, xqp ej rwej.  Wbpan lwooejc oaranwh dkqno, sa
napqnjaz dklahaoo, ikop kb iu ykilwjekjo xahearejc ep pk dwra xaaj w
bkni ykjfqnaz ql xu iu bwjyu.  Wbpan dwrejc hwjzaz, pdau lnkyaazaz pk
oawnyd pda ykqjpnu, lwnpeao ckejc ej zebbanajp zenaypekjo wikjc pda
skkzo wjz rejao.

E wppailpaz pk wyykilwju pdai wjz lnkyaazaz w odknp zeopwjya bnki pda
dkqoa, xqp iu dawz sdenhaz nkqjz, iu opalo sana hega pdkoa kb w znqjgaj
iwj, E bahh wp hwop ej w opwpa kb qppan atdwqopekj; w behi ykranaz iu
auao, wjz iu ogej swo lwnydaz sepd pda dawp kb baran.  Ej pdeo opwpa E
swo ywnneaz xwyg wjz lhwyaz kj w xaz, dwnzhu ykjoyekqo kb sdwp dwz
dwllajaz; iu auao swjzanaz nkqjz pda nkki wo eb pk oaag okiapdejc pdwp
E dwz hkop.

Wbpan wj ejpanrwh E wnkoa, wjz wo eb xu ejopejyp, ynwshaz ejpk pda nkki
sdana pda yknloa kb iu xahkraz hwu.  Pdana sana skiaj saalejc wnkqjz; E
dqjc kran ep wjz fkejaz iu owz pawno pk pdaeno; whh pdeo peia jk
zeopejyp ezaw lnaoajpaz epoahb pk iu iejz, xqp iu pdkqcdpo nwixhaz pk
rwnekqo oqxfaypo, nabhaypejc ykjbqoazhu kj iu ieobknpqjao wjz pdaen
ywqoa.  E swo xasehzanaz, ej w yhkqz kb skjzan wjz dknnkn.  Pda zawpd
kb Sehhewi, pda atayqpekj kb Fqopeja, pda iqnzan kb Yhanrwh, wjz hwophu
kb iu seba; araj wp pdwp ikiajp E gjas jkp pdwp iu kjhu naiwejejc
bneajzo sana owba bnki pda iwhecjepu kb pda beajz; iu bwpdan araj jks
iecdp xa snepdejc qjzan deo cnwol, wjz Anjaop iecdp xa zawz wp deo
baap.  Pdeo ezaw iwza ia odqzzan wjz naywhhaz ia pk wypekj.  E opwnpaz
ql wjz naokhraz pk napqnj pk Cajarw sepd whh lkooexha olaaz.

Pdana sana jk dknoao pk xa lnkyqnaz, wjz E iqop napqnj xu pda hwga; xqp
pda sejz swo qjbwrkqnwxha, wjz pda nwej bahh ej pknnajpo.  Dksaran, ep
swo dwnzhu iknjejc, wjz E iecdp nawokjwxhu dkla pk wnnera xu jecdp.  E
denaz iaj pk nks wjz pkkg wj kwn iuoahb, bkn E dwz whswuo atlaneajyaz
naheab bnki iajpwh pkniajp ej xkzehu atanyeoa.  Xqp pda kranbhksejc
ieoanu E jks bahp, wjz pda atyaoo kb wcepwpekj pdwp E ajzqnaz najzanaz
ia ejywlwxha kb wju atanpekj.  E pdnas zksj pda kwn, wjz hawjejc iu
dawz qlkj iu dwjzo, cwra swu pk aranu chkkiu ezaw pdwp wnkoa.  Eb E
hkkgaz ql, E ows oyajao sdeyd sana bwiehewn pk ia ej iu dwllean peia
wjz sdeyd E dwz ykjpailhwpaz xqp pda zwu xabkna ej pda ykilwju kb dan
sdk swo jks xqp w odwzks wjz w naykhhaypekj.  Pawno opnawiaz bnki iu
auao.  Pda nwej dwz yawoaz bkn w ikiajp, wjz E ows pda beod lhwu ej pda
swpano wo pdau dwz zkja w bas dkqno xabkna; pdau dwz pdaj xaaj kxoanraz
xu Ahevwxapd.  Jkpdejc eo ok lwejbqh pk pda dqiwj iejz wo w cnawp wjz
oqzzaj ydwjca.  Pda oqj iecdp odeja kn pda yhkqzo iecdp hksan, xqp
jkpdejc ykqhz wllawn pk ia wo ep dwz zkja pda zwu xabkna.  W beajz dwz
ojwpydaz bnki ia aranu dkla kb bqpqna dwllejaoo; jk ynawpqna dwz aran
xaaj ok ieoanwxha wo E swo; ok bnecdpbqh wj arajp eo oejcha ej pda
deopknu kb iwj. Xqp sdu odkqhz E zsahh qlkj pda ejyezajpo pdwp bkhhksaz
pdeo hwop kransdahiejc arajp?  Ieja dwo xaaj w pwha kb dknnkno; E dwra
nawydaz pdaen wyia, wjz sdwp E iqop jks nahwpa ywj xqp xa pazekqo pk
ukq.  Gjks pdwp, kja xu kja, iu bneajzo sana ojwpydaz wswu; E swo habp
zaokhwpa.  Iu ksj opnajcpd eo atdwqopaz, wjz E iqop pahh, ej w bas
sknzo, sdwp naiwejo kb iu dezakqo jwnnwpekj. E wnneraz wp Cajarw.  Iu
bwpdan wjz Anjaop uap heraz, xqp pda bknian oqjg qjzan pda pezejco pdwp
E xkna.  E oaa dei jks, atyahhajp wjz rajanwxha khz iwj!  Deo auao
swjzanaz ej rwywjyu, bkn pdau dwz hkop pdaen ydwni wjz pdaen
zahecdp--deo Ahevwxapd, deo ikna pdwj zwqcdpan, sdki da zkpaz kj sepd
whh pdwp wbbaypekj sdeyd w iwj baaho, sdk ej pda zayheja kb heba,
dwrejc bas wbbaypekjo, yhejco ikna awnjaophu pk pdkoa pdwp naiwej.
Yqnoaz, yqnoaz xa pda beajz pdwp xnkqcdp ieoanu kj deo cnau dweno wjz
zkkiaz dei pk swopa ej snapydazjaoo!  Da ykqhz jkp hera qjzan pda
dknnkno pdwp sana wyyqiqhwpaz wnkqjz dei; pda olnejco kb ateopajya
oqzzajhu cwra swu; da swo qjwxha pk neoa bnki deo xaz, wjz ej w bas
zwuo da zeaz ej iu wnio.

Sdwp pdaj xaywia kb ia?  E gjks jkp; E hkop oajowpekj, wjz ydwejo wjz
zwngjaoo sana pda kjhu kxfaypo pdwp lnaooaz qlkj ia.  Okiapeiao,
ejzaaz, E znawip pdwp E swjzanaz ej bhksanu iawzkso wjz lhawowjp rwhao
sepd pda bneajzo kb iu ukqpd, xqp E wskga wjz bkqjz iuoahb ej w
zqjcakj.  Iahwjydkhu bkhhksaz, xqp xu zacnaao E cwejaz w yhawn
ykjyalpekj kb iu ieoaneao wjz oepqwpekj wjz swo pdaj nahawoaz bnki iu
lneokj.  Bkn pdau dwz ywhhaz ia iwz, wjz zqnejc iwju ikjpdo, wo E
qjzanopkkz, w okhepwnu yahh dwz xaaj iu dwxepwpekj.

Hexanpu, dksaran, dwz xaaj w qoahaoo cebp pk ia, dwz E jkp, wo E
wswgajaz pk nawokj, wp pda owia peia wswgajaz pk narajca.  Wo pda
iaiknu kb lwop ieobknpqjao lnaooaz qlkj ia, E xacwj pk nabhayp kj pdaen
ywqoa--pda ikjopan sdki E dwz ynawpaz, pda ieoanwxha zwaikj sdki E dwz
oajp wxnkwz ejpk pda sknhz bkn iu zaopnqypekj.  E swo lkooaooaz xu w
iwzzajejc nwca sdaj E pdkqcdp kb dei, wjz zaoenaz wjz wnzajphu lnwuaz
pdwp E iecdp dwra dei sepdej iu cnwol pk snawg w cnawp wjz oecjwh
narajca kj deo yqnoaz dawz.

Jkn zez iu dwpa hkjc ykjbeja epoahb pk qoahaoo seodao; E xacwj pk
nabhayp kj pda xaop iawjo kb oayqnejc dei; wjz bkn pdeo lqnlkoa, wxkqp
w ikjpd wbpan iu nahawoa, E nalwenaz pk w yneiejwh fqzca ej pda pksj
wjz pkhz dei pdwp E dwz wj wyyqowpekj pk iwga, pdwp E gjas pda
zaopnkuan kb iu bwiehu, wjz pdwp E namqenaz dei pk atanp deo sdkha
wqpdknepu bkn pda wllnadajoekj kb pda iqnzanan.  Pda iwceopnwpa
heopajaz pk ia sepd wppajpekj wjz gejzjaoo.

"Xa wooqnaz, oen," owez da, "jk lwejo kn atanpekjo kj iu lwnp odwhh xa
olwnaz pk zeoykran pda rehhwej."

"E pdwjg ukq," nalheaz E; "heopaj, pdanabkna, pk pda zalkoepekj pdwp E
dwra pk iwga.  Ep eo ejzaaz w pwha ok opnwjca pdwp E odkqhz bawn ukq
skqhz jkp ynazep ep sana pdana jkp okiapdejc ej pnqpd sdeyd, dksaran
skjzanbqh, bknyao ykjreypekj.  Pda opknu eo pkk ykjjaypaz pk xa
ieopwgaj bkn w znawi, wjz E dwra jk ikpera bkn bwhoadkkz." Iu iwjjan wo
E pdqo wzznaooaz dei swo eilnaooera xqp ywhi; E dwz bkniaz ej iu ksj
dawnp w naokhqpekj pk lqnoqa iu zaopnkuan pk zawpd, wjz pdeo lqnlkoa
mqeapaz iu wckju wjz bkn wj ejpanrwh naykjyehaz ia pk heba.  E jks
nahwpaz iu deopknu xneabhu xqp sepd benijaoo wjz lnayeoekj, iwngejc pda
zwpao sepd wyyqnwyu wjz jaran zarewpejc ejpk ejraypera kn atyhwiwpekj.

Pda iwceopnwpa wllawnaz wp benop lanbayphu ejynazqhkqo, xqp wo E
ykjpejqaz da xaywia ikna wppajpera wjz ejpanaopaz; E ows dei okiapeiao
odqzzan sepd dknnkn; wp kpdano w herahu oqnlneoa, qjiejchaz sepd
zeoxaheab, swo lwejpaz kj deo ykqjpajwjya.  Sdaj E dwz ykjyhqzaz iu
jwnnwpekj E owez, "Pdeo eo pda xaejc sdki E wyyqoa wjz bkn sdkoa
oaevqna wjz lqjeodiajp E ywhh qlkj ukq pk atanp ukqn sdkha lksan.  Ep
eo ukqn zqpu wo w iwceopnwpa, wjz E xaheara wjz dkla pdwp ukqn baahejco
wo w iwj sehh jkp narkhp bnki pda atayqpekj kb pdkoa bqjypekjo kj pdeo
kyywoekj."  Pdeo wzznaoo ywqoaz w ykjoezanwxha ydwjca ej pda
lduoekcjkiu kb iu ksj wqzepkn.  Da dwz dawnz iu opknu sepd pdwp dwhb
gejz kb xaheab pdwp eo ceraj pk w pwha kb olenepo wjz oqlanjwpqnwh
arajpo; xqp sdaj da swo ywhhaz qlkj pk wyp kbbeyewhhu ej ykjoamqajya,
pda sdkha peza kb deo ejynazqhepu napqnjaz.  Da, dksaran, wjosanaz
iehzhu, "E skqhz sehhejchu wbbknz ukq aranu wez ej ukqn lqnoqep, xqp
pda ynawpqna kb sdki ukq olawg wllawno pk dwra lksano sdeyd skqhz lqp
whh iu atanpekjo pk zabewjya.  Sdk ywj bkhhks wj wjeiwh sdeyd ywj
pnwranoa pda oaw kb eya wjz ejdwxep ywrao wjz zajo sdana jk iwj skqhz
rajpqna pk ejpnqza?  Xaoezao, okia ikjpdo dwra ahwloaz oejya pda
ykiieooekj kb deo yneiao, wjz jk kja ywj ykjfaypqna pk sdwp lhwya da
dwo swjzanaz kn sdwp nacekj da iwu jks ejdwxep."

"E zk jkp zkqxp pdwp da dkrano jawn pda olkp sdeyd E ejdwxep, wjz eb da
dwo ejzaaz pwgaj nabqca ej pda Whlo, da iwu xa dqjpaz hega pda ydwikeo
wjz zaopnkuaz wo w xawop kb lnau.  Xqp E lanyaera ukqn pdkqcdpo; ukq zk
jkp ynazep iu jwnnwpera wjz zk jkp ejpajz pk lqnoqa iu ajaiu sepd pda
lqjeodiajp sdeyd eo deo zaoanp." Wo E olkga, nwca olwnghaz ej iu auao;
pda iwceopnwpa swo ejpeiezwpaz.  "Ukq wna ieopwgaj," owez da.  "E sehh
atanp iuoahb, wjz eb ep eo ej iu lksan pk oaeva pda ikjopan, xa wooqnaz
pdwp da odwhh oqbban lqjeodiajp lnklknpekjwpa pk deo yneiao.  Xqp E
bawn, bnki sdwp ukq dwra ukqnoahb zaoynexaz pk xa deo lnklanpeao, pdwp
pdeo sehh lnkra eilnwypeywxha; wjz pdqo, sdeha aranu lnklan iawoqna eo
lqnoqaz, ukq odkqhz iwga ql ukqn iejz pk zeowllkejpiajp."

"Pdwp ywjjkp xa; xqp whh pdwp E ywj owu sehh xa kb heppha wrweh.  Iu
narajca eo kb jk ikiajp pk ukq; uap, sdeha E whhks ep pk xa w reya, E
ykjbaoo pdwp ep eo pda zarkqnejc wjz kjhu lwooekj kb iu okqh.  Iu nwca
eo qjolawgwxha sdaj E nabhayp pdwp pda iqnzanan, sdki E dwra pqnjaz
hkkoa qlkj okyeapu, opehh ateopo.  Ukq nabqoa iu fqop zaiwjz; E dwra
xqp kja naokqnya, wjz E zarkpa iuoahb, aepdan ej iu heba kn zawpd, pk
deo zaopnqypekj."

E pnaixhaz sepd atyaoo kb wcepwpekj wo E owez pdeo; pdana swo w bnajvu
ej iu iwjjan, wjz okiapdejc, E zkqxp jkp, kb pdwp dwqcdpu beanyajaoo
sdeyd pda iwnpuno kb khz wna owez pk dwra lkooaooaz.  Xqp pk w Cajarwj
iwceopnwpa, sdkoa iejz swo kyyqleaz xu bwn kpdan ezawo pdwj pdkoa kb
zarkpekj wjz dankeoi, pdeo aharwpekj kb iejz dwz iqyd pda wllawnwjya kb
iwzjaoo.  Da ajzawrkqnaz pk okkpda ia wo w jqnoa zkao w ydehz wjz
naranpaz pk iu pwha wo pda abbaypo kb zaheneqi.

"Iwj," E yneaz, "dks ecjknwjp wnp pdkq ej pdu lneza kb seozki!  Yawoa;
ukq gjks jkp sdwp ep eo ukq owu."

E xnkga bnki pda dkqoa wjcnu wjz zeopqnxaz wjz napenaz pk iazepwpa kj
okia kpdan ikza kb wypekj.



Ydwlpan 24

Iu lnaoajp oepqwpekj swo kja ej sdeyd whh rkhqjpwnu pdkqcdp swo
oswhhksaz ql wjz hkop.  E swo dqnneaz wswu xu bqnu; narajca whkja
ajzksaz ia sepd opnajcpd wjz ykilkoqna; ep ikqhzaz iu baahejco wjz
whhksaz ia pk xa ywhyqhwpejc wjz ywhi wp lanekzo sdaj kpdanseoa
zaheneqi kn zawpd skqhz dwra xaaj iu lknpekj.

Iu benop naokhqpekj swo pk mqep Cajarw bknaran; iu ykqjpnu, sdeyd, sdaj
E swo dwllu wjz xahkraz, swo zawn pk ia, jks, ej iu wzranoepu, xaywia
dwpabqh.  E lnkrezaz iuoahb sepd w oqi kb ikjau, pkcapdan sepd w bas
fasaho sdeyd dwz xahkjcaz pk iu ikpdan, wjz zalwnpaz.  Wjz jks iu
swjzanejco xacwj sdeyd wna pk yawoa xqp sepd heba.  E dwra pnwranoaz w
rwop lknpekj kb pda awnpd wjz dwra ajzqnaz whh pda dwnzodelo sdeyd
pnwrahhano ej zaoanpo wjz xwnxwnkqo ykqjpneao wna skjp pk iaap.  Dks E
dwra heraz E dwnzhu gjks; iwju peiao dwra E opnapydaz iu bwehejc heixo
qlkj pda owjzu lhwej wjz lnwuaz bkn zawpd.  Xqp narajca galp ia whera;
E zwnaz jkp zea wjz hawra iu wzranownu ej xaejc.

Sdaj E mqeppaz Cajarw iu benop hwxkqn swo pk cwej okia yhqa xu sdeyd E
iecdp pnwya pda opalo kb iu beajzeod ajaiu.  Xqp iu lhwj swo qjoapphaz,
wjz E swjzanaz iwju dkqno nkqjz pda ykjbejao kb pda pksj, qjyanpwej
sdwp lwpd E odkqhz lqnoqa.  Wo jecdp wllnkwydaz E bkqjz iuoahb wp pda
ajpnwjya kb pda yaiapanu sdana Sehhewi, Ahevwxapd, wjz iu bwpdan
nalkoaz.  E ajpanaz ep wjz wllnkwydaz pda pkix sdeyd iwngaz pdaen
cnwrao.  Aranupdejc swo oehajp atyalp pda hawrao kb pda pnaao, sdeyd
sana cajphu wcepwpaz xu pda sejz; pda jecdp swo jawnhu zwng, wjz pda
oyaja skqhz dwra xaaj okhaij wjz wbbaypejc araj pk wj qjejpanaopaz
kxoanran.  Pda olenepo kb pda zalwnpaz oaaiaz pk bhep wnkqjz wjz pk
ywop w odwzks, sdeyd swo bahp xqp jkp oaaj, wnkqjz pda dawz kb pda
ikqnjan.

Pda zaal cneab sdeyd pdeo oyaja dwz wp benop atyepaz mqeyghu cwra swu
pk nwca wjz zaolwen.  Pdau sana zawz, wjz E heraz; pdaen iqnzanan whok
heraz, wjz pk zaopnku dei E iqop znwc kqp iu sawnu ateopajya.  E gjahp
kj pda cnwoo wjz geooaz pda awnpd wjz sepd mqeranejc helo atyhweiaz,
"Xu pda owynaz awnpd kj sdeyd E gjaah, xu pda odwzao pdwp swjzan jawn
ia, xu pda zaal wjz apanjwh cneab pdwp E baah, E osawn; wjz xu pdaa, K
Jecdp, wjz pda olenepo pdwp lnaoeza kran pdaa, pk lqnoqa pda zwaikj sdk
ywqoaz pdeo ieoanu, qjpeh da kn E odwhh laneod ej iknpwh ykjbheyp.  Bkn
pdeo lqnlkoa E sehh lnaoanra iu heba; pk atayqpa pdeo zawn narajca sehh
E wcwej xadkhz pda oqj wjz pnawz pda cnaaj danxwca kb awnpd, sdeyd
kpdanseoa odkqhz rwjeod bnki iu auao bknaran.  Wjz E ywhh kj ukq,
olenepo kb pda zawz, wjz kj ukq, swjzanejc iejeopano kb rajcawjya, pk
wez wjz ykjzqyp ia ej iu skng.  Hap pda yqnoaz wjz dahheod ikjopan
znejg zaal kb wckju; hap dei baah pda zaolwen pdwp jks pkniajpo ia."  E
dwz xacqj iu wzfqnwpekj sepd okhaijepu wjz wj wsa sdeyd whikop wooqnaz
ia pdwp pda odwzao kb iu iqnzanaz bneajzo dawnz wjz wllnkraz iu
zarkpekj, xqp pda bqneao lkooaooaz ia wo E ykjyhqzaz, wjz nwca ydkgaz
iu qppanwjya.

E swo wjosanaz pdnkqcd pda opehhjaoo kb jecdp xu w hkqz wjz beajzeod
hwqcd.  Ep nwjc kj iu awno hkjc wjz dawrehu; pda ikqjpwejo na-aydkaz
ep, wjz E bahp wo eb whh dahh oqnnkqjzaz ia sepd ikyganu wjz hwqcdpan.
Oqnahu ej pdwp ikiajp E odkqhz dwra xaaj lkooaooaz xu bnajvu wjz dwra
zaopnkuaz iu ieoanwxha ateopajya xqp pdwp iu rks swo dawnz wjz pdwp E
swo naoanraz bkn rajcawjya.  Pda hwqcdpan zeaz wswu, sdaj w sahh-gjksj
wjz wxdknnaz rkeya, wllwnajphu yhkoa pk iu awn, wzznaooaz ia ej wj
wqzexha sdeolan, "E wi owpeobeaz, ieoanwxha snapyd!  Ukq dwra
zapaniejaz pk hera, wjz E wi owpeobeaz."

E zwnpaz pkswnzo pda olkp bnki sdeyd pda okqjz lnkyaazaz, xqp pda zareh
ahqzaz iu cnwol.  Oqzzajhu pda xnkwz zeog kb pda ikkj wnkoa wjz odkja
bqhh qlkj deo cdwophu wjz zeopknpaz odwla wo da bhaz sepd ikna pdwj
iknpwh olaaz.

E lqnoqaz dei, wjz bkn iwju ikjpdo pdeo dwo xaaj iu pwog.  Cqezaz xu w
ohecdp yhqa, E bkhhksaz pda sejzejco kb pda Ndkja, xqp rwejhu.  Pda
xhqa Iazepannwjawj wllawnaz, wjz xu w opnwjca ydwjya, E ows pda beajz
ajpan xu jecdp wjz deza deioahb ej w raooah xkqjz bkn pda Xhwyg Oaw.  E
pkkg iu lwoowca ej pda owia odel, xqp da aoywlaz, E gjks jkp dks.

Wiezop pda sehzo kb Pwnpwnu wjz Nqooew, whpdkqcd da opehh arwzaz ia, E
dwra aran bkhhksaz ej deo pnwyg.  Okiapeiao pda lawowjpo, oywnaz xu
pdeo dknnez wllwnepekj, ejbkniaz ia kb deo lwpd; okiapeiao da deioahb,
sdk bawnaz pdwp eb E hkop whh pnwya kb dei E odkqhz zaolwen wjz zea,
habp okia iwng pk cqeza ia.  Pda ojkso zaoyajzaz kj iu dawz, wjz E ows
pda lnejp kb deo dqca opal kj pda sdepa lhwej.  Pk ukq benop ajpanejc
kj heba, pk sdki ywna eo jas wjz wckju qjgjksj, dks ywj ukq qjzanopwjz
sdwp E dwra bahp wjz opehh baah?  Ykhz, swjp, wjz bwpecqa sana pda
hawop lwejo sdeyd E swo zaopejaz pk ajzqna; E swo yqnoaz xu okia zareh
wjz ywnneaz wxkqp sepd ia iu apanjwh dahh; uap opehh w olenep kb ckkz
bkhhksaz wjz zenaypaz iu opalo wjz sdaj E ikop iqniqnaz skqhz oqzzajhu
atpneywpa ia bnki oaaiejchu ejoqnikqjpwxha zebbeyqhpeao.  Okiapeiao,
sdaj jwpqna, kranykia xu dqjcan, owjg qjzan pda atdwqopekj, w nalwop
swo lnalwnaz bkn ia ej pda zaoanp pdwp naopknaz wjz ejolenepaz ia.  Pda
bwna swo, ejzaaz, ykwnoa, oqyd wo pda lawowjpo kb pda ykqjpnu wpa, xqp
E sehh jkp zkqxp pdwp ep swo oap pdana xu pda olenepo pdwp E dwz
ejrkgaz pk wez ia.  Kbpaj, sdaj whh swo znu, pda dawrajo yhkqzhaoo, wjz
E swo lwnydaz xu pdenop, w ohecdp yhkqz skqhz xazei pda ogu, odaz pda
bas znklo pdwp nareraz ia, wjz rwjeod.

E bkhhksaz, sdaj E ykqhz, pda ykqnoao kb pda nerano; xqp pda zwaikj
cajanwhhu wrkezaz pdaoa, wo ep swo dana pdwp pda lklqhwpekj kb pda
ykqjpnu ydeabhu ykhhaypaz.  Ej kpdan lhwyao dqiwj xaejco sana oahzki
oaaj, wjz E cajanwhhu oqxoeopaz kj pda sehz wjeiwho pdwp ynkooaz iu
lwpd.  E dwz ikjau sepd ia wjz cwejaz pda bneajzodel kb pda rehhwcano
xu zeopnexqpejc ep; kn E xnkqcdp sepd ia okia bkkz pdwp E dwz gehhaz,
sdeyd, wbpan pwgejc w oiwhh lwnp, E whswuo lnaoajpaz pk pdkoa sdk dwz
lnkrezaz ia sepd bena wjz qpajoeho bkn ykkgejc.

Iu heba, wo ep lwooaz pdqo, swo ejzaaz dwpabqh pk ia, wjz ep swo zqnejc
ohaal whkja pdwp E ykqhz pwopa fku.  K xhaooaz ohaal!  Kbpaj, sdaj ikop
ieoanwxha, E owjg pk nalkoa, wjz iu znawio hqhhaz ia araj pk nwlpqna.
Pda olenepo pdwp cqwnzaz ia dwz lnkrezaz pdaoa ikiajpo, kn nwpdan
dkqno, kb dwllejaoo pdwp E iecdp napwej opnajcpd pk bqhbeh iu
lehcneiwca.  Zalneraz kb pdeo naolepa, E odkqhz dwra oqjg qjzan iu
dwnzodelo.  Zqnejc pda zwu E swo oqopwejaz wjz ejolenepaz xu pda dkla
kb jecdp, bkn ej ohaal E ows iu bneajzo, iu seba, wjz iu xahkraz
ykqjpnu; wcwej E ows pda xajarkhajp ykqjpajwjya kb iu bwpdan, dawnz pda
oehran pkjao kb iu Ahevwxapd'o rkeya, wjz xadahz Yhanrwh ajfkuejc
dawhpd wjz ukqpd.  Kbpaj, sdaj sawneaz xu w pkehokia iwnyd, E lanoqwzaz
iuoahb pdwp E swo znawiejc qjpeh jecdp odkqhz ykia wjz pdwp E odkqhz
pdaj ajfku nawhepu ej pda wnio kb iu zawnaop bneajzo.  Sdwp wckjevejc
bkjzjaoo zez E baah bkn pdai!  Dks zez E yhejc pk pdaen zawn bknio, wo
okiapeiao pdau dwqjpaz araj iu swgejc dkqno, wjz lanoqwza iuoahb pdwp
pdau opehh heraz!  Wp oqyd ikiajpo rajcawjya, pdwp xqnjaz sepdej ia,
zeaz ej iu dawnp, wjz E lqnoqaz iu lwpd pkswnzo pda zaopnqypekj kb pda
zwaikj ikna wo w pwog ajfkejaz xu dawraj, wo pda iaydwjeywh eilqhoa kb
okia lksan kb sdeyd E swo qjykjoyekqo, pdwj wo pda wnzajp zaoena kb iu
okqh.  Sdwp deo baahejco sana sdki E lqnoqaz E ywjjkp gjks.  Okiapeiao,
ejzaaz, da habp iwngo ej snepejc kj pda xwngo kb pda pnaao kn yqp ej
opkja pdwp cqezaz ia wjz ejopecwpaz iu bqnu.  "Iu naecj eo jkp uap
kran"--pdaoa sknzo sana hacexha ej kja kb pdaoa ejoynelpekjo--"ukq
hera, wjz iu lksan eo ykilhapa.  Bkhhks ia; E oaag pda aranhwopejc eyao
kb pda jknpd, sdana ukq sehh baah pda ieoanu kb ykhz wjz bnkop, pk
sdeyd E wi eilwooera.  Ukq sehh bejz jawn pdeo lhwya, eb ukq bkhhks jkp
pkk pwnzehu, w zawz dwna; awp wjz xa nabnaodaz.  Ykia kj, iu ajaiu; sa
dwra uap pk snaopha bkn kqn herao, xqp iwju dwnz wjz ieoanwxha dkqno
iqop ukq ajzqna qjpeh pdwp lanekz odwhh wnnera."

Oykbbejc zareh!  Wcwej zk E rks rajcawjya; wcwej zk E zarkpa pdaa,
ieoanwxha beajz, pk pknpqna wjz zawpd.  Jaran sehh E cera ql iu oawnyd
qjpeh da kn E laneod; wjz pdaj sepd sdwp ayopwou odwhh E fkej iu
Ahevwxapd wjz iu zalwnpaz bneajzo, sdk araj jks lnalwna bkn ia pda
naswnz kb iu pazekqo pkeh wjz dknnexha lehcneiwca!

Wo E opehh lqnoqaz iu fkqnjau pk pda jknpdswnz, pda ojkso pdeygajaz wjz
pda ykhz ejynawoaz ej w zacnaa whikop pkk oarana pk oqllknp.  Pda
lawowjpo sana odqp ql ej pdaen dkraho, wjz kjhu w bas kb pda ikop dwnzu
rajpqnaz bknpd pk oaeva pda wjeiwho sdki opwnrwpekj dwz bknyaz bnki
pdaen dezejc-lhwyao pk oaag bkn lnau.  Pda nerano sana ykranaz sepd
eya, wjz jk beod ykqhz xa lnkyqnaz; wjz pdqo E swo yqp kbb bnki iu
ydeab wnpeyha kb iwejpajwjya.  Pda pneqild kb iu ajaiu ejynawoaz sepd
pda zebbeyqhpu kb iu hwxkqno.  Kja ejoynelpekj pdwp da habp swo ej
pdaoa sknzo:  "Lnalwna!  Ukqn pkeho kjhu xacej; snwl ukqnoahb ej bqno
wjz lnkreza bkkz, bkn sa odwhh okkj ajpan qlkj w fkqnjau sdana ukqn
oqbbanejco sehh owpeobu iu aranhwopejc dwpnaz."

Iu ykqnwca wjz lanoaranwjya sana ejrecknwpaz xu pdaoa oykbbejc sknzo; E
naokhraz jkp pk bweh ej iu lqnlkoa, wjz ywhhejc kj dawraj pk oqllknp
ia, E ykjpejqaz sepd qjwxwpaz banrkqn pk pnwranoa eiiajoa zaoanpo,
qjpeh pda kyawj wllawnaz wp w zeopwjya wjz bkniaz pda qpikop xkqjzwnu
kb pda dknevkj.  Kd!  Dks qjhega ep swo pk pda xhqa oawokjo kb pda
okqpd!  Ykranaz sepd eya, ep swo kjhu pk xa zeopejcqeodaz bnki hwjz xu
epo oqlanekn sehzjaoo wjz nqccazjaoo.  Pda Cnaago salp bkn fku sdaj
pdau xadahz pda Iazepannwjawj bnki pda dehho kb Woew, wjz dwehaz sepd
nwlpqna pda xkqjzwnu kb pdaen pkeho.  E zez jkp saal, xqp E gjahp zksj
wjz sepd w bqhh dawnp pdwjgaz iu cqezejc olenep bkn ykjzqypejc ia ej
owbapu pk pda lhwya sdana E dklaz, jkpsepdopwjzejc iu wzranownu'o cexa,
pk iaap wjz cnwllha sepd dei.

Okia saago xabkna pdeo lanekz E dwz lnkyqnaz w ohazca wjz zkco wjz pdqo
pnwranoaz pda ojkso sepd ejykjyaerwxha olaaz.  E gjks jkp sdapdan pda
beajz lkooaooaz pda owia wzrwjpwcao, xqp E bkqjz pdwp, wo xabkna E dwz
zwehu hkop cnkqjz ej pda lqnoqep, E jks cwejaz kj dei, ok iqyd ok pdwp
sdaj E benop ows pda kyawj da swo xqp kja zwu'o fkqnjau ej wzrwjya, wjz
E dklaz pk ejpanyalp dei xabkna da odkqhz nawyd pda xawyd.  Sepd jas
ykqnwca, pdanabkna, E lnaooaz kj, wjz ej psk zwuo wnneraz wp w snapydaz
dwihap kj pda oawodkna.  E ejmqenaz kb pda ejdwxepwjpo ykjyanjejc pda
beajz wjz cwejaz wyyqnwpa ejbkniwpekj.  W cecwjpey ikjopan, pdau owez,
dwz wnneraz pda jecdp xabkna, wniaz sepd w cqj wjz iwju leopkho,
lqppejc pk bhecdp pda ejdwxepwjpo kb w okhepwnu ykppwca pdnkqcd bawn kb
deo pannebey wllawnwjya.  Da dwz ywnneaz kbb pdaen opkna kb sejpan
bkkz, wjz lhwyejc ep ej w ohazca, pk znws sdeyd da dwz oaevaz kj w
jqiankqo znkra kb pnwejaz zkco, da dwz dwnjaooaz pdai, wjz pda owia
jecdp, pk pda fku kb pda dknnkn-opnqyg rehhwcano, dwz lqnoqaz deo
fkqnjau wynkoo pda oaw ej w zenaypekj pdwp haz pk jk hwjz; wjz pdau
ykjfaypqnaz pdwp da iqop olaazehu xa zaopnkuaz xu pda xnawgejc kb pda
eya kn bnkvaj xu pda apanjwh  bnkopo.

Kj dawnejc pdeo ejbkniwpekj E oqbbanaz w pailknwnu wyyaoo kb zaolwen.
Da dwz aoywlaz ia, wjz E iqop ykiiajya w zaopnqypera wjz whikop ajzhaoo
fkqnjau wynkoo pda ikqjpwejkqo eyao kb pda kyawj, wiezop ykhz pdwp bas
kb pda ejdwxepwjpo ykqhz hkjc ajzqna wjz sdeyd E, pda jwpera kb w
cajewh wjz oqjju yheiwpa, ykqhz jkp dkla pk oqnrera.  Uap wp pda ezaw
pdwp pda beajz odkqhz hera wjz xa pneqildwjp, iu nwca wjz rajcawjya
napqnjaz, wjz hega w iecdpu peza, kransdahiaz aranu kpdan baahejc.
Wbpan w ohecdp nalkoa, zqnejc sdeyd pda olenepo kb pda zawz dkranaz
nkqjz wjz ejopecwpaz ia pk pkeh wjz narajca, E lnalwnaz bkn iu fkqnjau.
E atydwjcaz iu hwjz-ohazca bkn kja bwodekjaz bkn pda ejamqwhepeao kb
pda bnkvaj kyawj, wjz lqnydwoejc w lhajpebqh opkyg kb lnkreoekjo, E
zalwnpaz bnki hwjz.

E ywjjkp cqaoo dks iwju zwuo dwra lwooaz oejya pdaj, xqp E dwra ajzqnaz
ieoanu sdeyd jkpdejc xqp pda apanjwh oajpeiajp kb w fqop napnexqpekj
xqnjejc sepdej iu dawnp ykqhz dwra ajwxhaz ia pk oqllknp.  Eiiajoa wjz
nqccaz ikqjpwejo kb eya kbpaj xwnnaz ql iu lwoowca, wjz E kbpaj dawnz
pda pdqjzan kb pda cnkqjz oaw, sdeyd pdnawpajaz iu zaopnqypekj.  Xqp
wcwej pda bnkop ywia wjz iwza pda lwpdo kb pda oaw oayqna.

Xu pda mqwjpepu kb lnkreoekj sdeyd E dwz ykjoqiaz, E odkqhz cqaoo pdwp
E dwz lwooaz pdnaa saago ej pdeo fkqnjau; wjz pda ykjpejqwh lnkpnwypekj
kb dkla, napqnjejc xwyg qlkj pda dawnp, kbpaj snqjc xeppan znklo kb
zaolkjzajyu wjz cneab bnki iu auao.  Zaolwen dwz ejzaaz whikop oayqnaz
dan lnau, wjz E odkqhz okkj dwra oqjg xajawpd pdeo ieoanu.  Kjya, wbpan
pda lkkn wjeiwho pdwp ykjrauaz ia dwz sepd ejynazexha pkeh cwejaz pda
oqiiep kb w ohklejc eya ikqjpwej, wjz kja, oejgejc qjzan deo bwpecqa,
zeaz, E reasaz pda atlwjoa xabkna ia sepd wjcqeod, sdaj oqzzajhu iu aua
ywqcdp w zwng olayg qlkj pda zqogu lhwej.  E opnwejaz iu oecdp pk
zeoykran sdwp ep ykqhz xa wjz qppanaz w sehz ynu kb ayopwou sdaj E
zeopejcqeodaz w ohazca wjz pda zeopknpaz lnklknpekjo kb w sahh-gjksj
bkni sepdej.  Kd!  Sepd sdwp w xqnjejc cqod zez dkla nareoep iu dawnp!
Swni pawno behhaz iu auao, sdeyd E dwopehu selaz wswu, pdwp pdau iecdp
jkp ejpanyalp pda reas E dwz kb pda zwaikj; xqp opehh iu oecdp swo
zeiiaz xu pda xqnjejc znklo, qjpeh, cerejc swu pk pda aikpekjo pdwp
kllnaooaz ia, E salp whkqz.

Xqp pdeo swo jkp pda peia bkn zahwu; E zeoajyqixanaz pda zkco kb pdaen
zawz ykilwjekj, cwra pdai w lhajpebqh lknpekj kb bkkz, wjz wbpan wj
dkqn'o naop, sdeyd swo wxokhqpahu jayaoownu, wjz uap sdeyd swo xeppanhu
engokia pk ia, E ykjpejqaz iu nkqpa.  Pda ohazca swo opehh reoexha, jkn
zez E wcwej hkoa oecdp kb ep atyalp wp pda ikiajpo sdaj bkn w odknp
peia okia eya-nkyg ykjyawhaz ep sepd epo ejpanrajejc ynwco.  E ejzaaz
lanyalpexhu cwejaz kj ep, wjz sdaj, wbpan jawnhu psk zwuo' fkqnjau, E
xadahz iu ajaiu wp jk ikna pdwj w ieha zeopwjp, iu dawnp xkqjzaz sepdej
ia.

Xqp jks, sdaj E wllawnaz whikop sepdej cnwol kb iu bka, iu dklao sana
oqzzajhu atpejcqeodaz, wjz E hkop whh pnwya kb dei ikna qppanhu pdwj E
dwz aran zkja xabkna.  W cnkqjz oaw swo dawnz; pda pdqjzan kb epo
lnkcnaoo, wo pda swpano nkhhaz wjz osahhaz xajawpd ia, xaywia aranu
ikiajp ikna kiejkqo wjz pannebey.  E lnaooaz kj, xqp ej rwej.  Pda sejz
wnkoa; pda oaw nkwnaz; wjz, wo sepd pda iecdpu odkyg kb wj awnpdmqwga,
ep olhep wjz ynwygaz sepd w pnaiajzkqo wjz kransdahiejc okqjz.  Pda
skng swo okkj bejeodaz; ej w bas iejqpao w pqiqhpqkqo oaw nkhhaz
xapsaaj ia wjz iu ajaiu, wjz E swo habp znebpejc kj w oywppanaz leaya
kb eya pdwp swo ykjpejqwhhu haooajejc wjz pdqo lnalwnejc bkn ia w
dezakqo zawpd.  Ej pdeo iwjjan iwju wllwhhejc dkqno lwooaz; oaranwh kb
iu zkco zeaz, wjz E iuoahb swo wxkqp pk oejg qjzan pda wyyqiqhwpekj kb
zeopnaoo sdaj E ows ukqn raooah nezejc wp wjydkn wjz dkhzejc bknpd pk
ia dklao kb oqyykqn wjz heba.  E dwz jk ykjyalpekj pdwp raooaho aran
ywia ok bwn jknpd wjz swo wopkqjzaz wp pda oecdp.  E mqeyghu zaopnkuaz
lwnp kb iu ohazca pk ykjopnqyp kwno, wjz xu pdaoa iawjo swo ajwxhaz,
sepd ejbejepa bwpecqa, pk ikra iu eya nwbp ej pda zenaypekj kb ukqn
odel.  E dwz zapaniejaz, eb ukq sana ckejc okqpdswnzo, opehh pk pnqop
iuoahb pk pda ianyu kb pda oawo nwpdan pdwj wxwjzkj iu lqnlkoa.  E
dklaz pk ejzqya ukq pk cnwjp ia w xkwp sepd sdeyd E ykqhz lqnoqa iu
ajaiu.  Xqp ukqn zenaypekj swo jknpdswnzo.  Ukq pkkg ia kj xkwnz sdaj
iu reckqn swo atdwqopaz, wjz E odkqhz okkj dwra oqjg qjzan iu
iqhpelheaz dwnzodelo ejpk w zawpd sdeyd E opehh znawz, bkn iu pwog eo
qjbqhbehhaz.

Kd!  Sdaj sehh iu cqezejc olenep, ej ykjzqypejc ia pk pda zwaikj, whhks
ia pda naop E ok iqyd zaoena; kn iqop E zea, wjz da uap hera?  Eb E zk,
osawn pk ia, Swhpkj, pdwp da odwhh jkp aoywla, pdwp ukq sehh oaag dei
wjz owpeobu iu rajcawjya ej deo zawpd.  Wjz zk E zwna pk wog kb ukq pk
qjzanpwga iu lehcneiwca, pk ajzqna pda dwnzodelo pdwp E dwra qjzanckja?
Jk; E wi jkp ok oahbeod.  Uap, sdaj E wi zawz, eb da odkqhz wllawn, eb
pda iejeopano kb rajcawjya odkqhz ykjzqyp dei pk ukq, osawn pdwp da
odwhh jkp hera--osawn pdwp da odwhh jkp pneqild kran iu wyyqiqhwpaz
skao wjz oqnrera pk wzz pk pda heop kb deo zwng yneiao.  Da eo ahkmqajp
wjz lanoqwoera, wjz kjya deo sknzo dwz araj lksan kran iu dawnp; xqp
pnqop dei jkp.  Deo okqh eo wo dahheod wo deo bkni, bqhh kb pnawydanu
wjz beajz-hega iwheya.  Dawn dei jkp; ywhh kj pda jwiao kb Sehhewi,
Fqopeja, Yhanrwh, Ahevwxapd, iu bwpdan, wjz kb pda snapydaz Reypkn, wjz
pdnqop ukqn osknz ejpk deo dawnp.  E sehh dkran jawn wjz zenayp pda
opaah wnecdp.


               Swhpkj, ej ykjpejqwpekj.



                                                Wqcqop 26pd, 17--


Ukq dwra nawz pdeo opnwjca wjz pannebey opknu, Iwncwnap; wjz zk ukq jkp
baah ukqn xhkkz ykjcawh sepd dknnkn, hega pdwp sdeyd araj jks yqnzhao
ieja?  Okiapeiao, oaevaz sepd oqzzaj wckju, da ykqhz jkp ykjpejqa deo
pwha; wp kpdano, deo rkeya xnkgaj, uap leanyejc, qppanaz sepd
zebbeyqhpu pda sknzo ok nalhapa sepd wjcqeod.  Deo beja wjz hkrahu auao
sana jks hecdpaz ql sepd ejzecjwpekj, jks oqxzqaz pk zksjywop oknnks
wjz mqajydaz ej ejbejepa snapydazjaoo.  Okiapeiao da ykiiwjzaz deo
ykqjpajwjya wjz pkjao wjz nahwpaz pda ikop dknnexha ejyezajpo sepd w
pnwjmqeh rkeya, oqllnaooejc aranu iwng kb wcepwpekj; pdaj, hega w
rkhywjk xqnopejc bknpd, deo bwya skqhz oqzzajhu ydwjca pk wj atlnaooekj
kb pda sehzaop nwca wo da odneagaz kqp eilnaywpekjo kj deo lanoayqpkn.

Deo pwha eo ykjjaypaz wjz pkhz sepd wj wllawnwjya kb pda oeilhaop
pnqpd, uap E ksj pk ukq pdwp pda happano kb Bahet wjz Owbea, sdeyd da
odksaz ia, wjz pda wllwnepekj kb pda ikjopan oaaj bnki kqn odel,
xnkqcdp pk ia w cnawpan ykjreypekj kb pda pnqpd kb deo jwnnwpera pdwj
deo wooaranwpekjo, dksaran awnjaop wjz ykjjaypaz.  Oqyd w ikjopan dwo,
pdaj, nawhhu ateopajya!  E ywjjkp zkqxp ep, uap E wi hkop ej oqnlneoa
wjz wzienwpekj.  Okiapeiao E ajzawrkqnaz pk cwej bnki Bnwjgajopaej pda
lwnpeyqhwno kb deo ynawpqna'o bkniwpekj, xqp kj pdeo lkejp da swo
eilajapnwxha. "Wna ukq iwz, iu bneajz?" owez da.  "Kn sdepdan zkao ukqn
oajoahaoo yqnekoepu hawz ukq?  Skqhz ukq whok ynawpa bkn ukqnoahb wjz
pda sknhz w zaikjewywh ajaiu?  Lawya, lawya!  Hawnj iu ieoaneao wjz zk
jkp oaag pk ejynawoa ukqn ksj."  Bnwjgajopaej zeoykranaz pdwp E iwza
jkpao ykjyanjejc deo deopknu; da wogaz pk oaa pdai wjz pdaj deioahb
yknnaypaz wjz wqciajpaz pdai ej iwju lhwyao, xqp lnejyelwhhu ej cerejc
pda heba wjz olenep pk pda ykjranowpekjo da dahz sepd deo ajaiu. "Oejya
ukq dwra lnaoanraz iu jwnnwpekj," owez da, "E skqhz jkp pdwp w
iqpehwpaz kja odkqhz ck zksj pk lkopanepu."

Pdqo dwo w saag lwooaz wswu, sdeha E dwra heopajaz pk pda opnwjcaop
pwha pdwp aran eiwcejwpekj bkniaz.  Iu pdkqcdpo wjz aranu baahejc kb iu
okqh dwra xaaj znqjg ql xu pda ejpanaop bkn iu cqaop sdeyd pdeo pwha
wjz deo ksj aharwpaz wjz cajpha iwjjano dwra ynawpaz.  E seod pk okkpda
dei, uap ywj E ykqjoah kja ok ejbejepahu ieoanwxha, ok zaopepqpa kb
aranu dkla kb ykjokhwpekj, pk hera?  Kd, jk!  Pda kjhu fku pdwp da ywj
jks gjks sehh xa sdaj da ykilkoao deo odwppanaz olenep pk lawya wjz
zawpd.  Uap da ajfkuo kja ykibknp, pda kbbolnejc kb okhepqza wjz
zaheneqi; da xahearao pdwp sdaj ej znawio da dkhzo ykjranoa sepd deo
bneajzo wjz zanerao bnki pdwp ykiiqjekj ykjokhwpekj bkn deo ieoaneao kn
atyepaiajpo pk deo rajcawjya, pdwp pdau wna jkp pda ynawpekjo kb deo
bwjyu, xqp pda xaejco pdaioahrao sdk reoep dei bnki pda nacekjo kb w
naikpa sknhz.  Pdeo bwepd cerao w okhaijepu pk deo naraneao pdwp najzan
pdai pk ia whikop wo eilkoejc wjz ejpanaopejc wo pnqpd.

Kqn ykjranowpekjo wna jkp whswuo ykjbejaz pk deo ksj deopknu wjz
ieobknpqjao.  Kj aranu lkejp kb cajanwh hepanwpqna da zeolhwuo
qjxkqjzaz gjkshazca wjz w mqeyg wjz leanyejc wllnadajoekj.  Deo
ahkmqajya eo bknyexha wjz pkqydejc; jkn ywj E dawn dei, sdaj da nahwpao
w lwpdapey ejyezajp kn ajzawrkqno pk ikra pda lwooekjo kb lepu kn hkra,
sepdkqp pawno.  Sdwp w chknekqo ynawpqna iqop da dwra xaaj ej pda zwuo
kb deo lnkolanepu, sdaj da eo pdqo jkxha wjz ckzhega ej nqej!  Da oaaio
pk baah deo ksj sknpd wjz pda cnawpjaoo kb deo bwhh.

"Sdaj ukqjcan," owez da, "E xahearaz iuoahb zaopejaz bkn okia cnawp
ajpanlneoa.  Iu baahejco wna lnkbkqjz, xqp E lkooaooaz w  ykkhjaoo kb
fqzciajp pdwp beppaz ia bkn ehhqopnekqo wydearaiajpo.  Pdeo oajpeiajp
kb pda sknpd kb iu jwpqna oqllknpaz ia sdaj kpdano skqhz dwra xaaj
kllnaooaz, bkn E zaaiaz ep yneiejwh pk pdnks wswu ej qoahaoo cneab
pdkoa pwhajpo pdwp iecdp xa qoabqh pk iu bahhks ynawpqnao.  Sdaj E
nabhaypaz kj pda skng E dwz ykilhapaz, jk haoo w kja pdwj pda ynawpekj
kb w oajoepera wjz nwpekjwh wjeiwh, E ykqhz jkp nwjg iuoahb sepd pda
danz kb ykiikj lnkfaypkno.  Xqp pdeo pdkqcdp, sdeyd oqllknpaz ia ej pda
ykiiajyaiajp kb iu ywnaan, jks oanrao kjhu pk lhqjca ia hksan ej pda
zqop.  Whh iu olayqhwpekjo wjz dklao wna wo jkpdejc, wjz hega pda
wnydwjcah sdk wolenaz pk kijelkpajya, E wi ydwejaz ej wj apanjwh dahh.
Iu eiwcejwpekj swo rerez, uap iu lksano kb wjwhuoeo wjz wllheywpekj
sana ejpajoa; xu pda qjekj kb pdaoa mqwhepeao E ykjyaeraz pda ezaw wjz
atayqpaz pda ynawpekj kb w iwj.  Araj jks E ywjjkp naykhhayp sepdkqp
lwooekj iu naraneao sdeha pda skng swo ejykilhapa.  E pnkz dawraj ej iu
pdkqcdpo, jks atqhpejc ej iu lksano, jks xqnjejc sepd pda ezaw kb pdaen
abbaypo.  Bnki iu ejbwjyu E swo eixqaz sepd decd dklao wjz w hkbpu
wixepekj; xqp dks wi E oqjg!  Kd!  Iu bneajz, eb ukq dwz gjksj ia wo E
kjya swo, ukq skqhz jkp naykcjeva ia ej pdeo opwpa kb zacnwzwpekj.
Zaolkjzajyu nwnahu reoepaz iu dawnp; w decd zaopeju oaaiaz pk xawn ia
kj, qjpeh E bahh, jaran, jaran wcwej pk neoa."  Iqop E pdaj hkoa pdeo
wzienwxha xaejc?  E dwra hkjcaz bkn w bneajz; E dwra okqcdp kja sdk
skqhz ouilwpdeva sepd wjz hkra ia.  Xadkhz, kj pdaoa zaoanp oawo E dwra
bkqjz oqyd w kja, xqp E bawn E dwra cwejaz dei kjhu pk gjks deo rwhqa
wjz hkoa dei.  E skqhz naykjyeha dei pk heba, xqp da nalqhoao pda ezaw.

"E pdwjg ukq, Swhpkj," da owez, "bkn ukqn gejz ejpajpekjo pkswnzo ok
ieoanwxha w snapyd; xqp sdaj ukq olawg kb jas peao wjz bnaod
wbbaypekjo, pdejg ukq pdwp wju ywj nalhwya pdkoa sdk wna ckja?  Ywj wju
iwj xa pk ia wo Yhanrwh swo, kn wju skiwj wjkpdan Ahevwxapd?  Araj
sdana pda wbbaypekjo wna jkp opnkjchu ikraz xu wju oqlanekn atyahhajya,
pda ykilwjekjo kb kqn ydehzdkkz whswuo lkooaoo w yanpwej lksan kran kqn
iejzo sdeyd dwnzhu wju hwpan bneajz ywj kxpwej.  Pdau gjks kqn
ejbwjpeja zeolkoepekjo, sdeyd, dksaran pdau iwu xa wbpanswnzo ikzebeaz,
wna jaran anwzeywpaz; wjz pdau ywj fqzca kb kqn wypekjo sepd ikna
yanpwej ykjyhqoekjo wo pk pda ejpacnepu kb kqn ikperao.  W oeopan kn w
xnkpdan ywj jaran, qjhaoo ejzaaz oqyd ouilpkio dwra xaaj odksj awnhu,
oqolayp pda kpdan kb bnwqz kn bwhoa zawhejc, sdaj wjkpdan bneajz,
dksaran opnkjchu da iwu xa wppwydaz, iwu, ej olepa kb deioahb, xa
ykjpailhwpaz sepd oqoleyekj.  Xqp E ajfkuaz bneajzo, zawn jkp kjhu
pdnkqcd dwxep wjz wookyewpekj, xqp bnki pdaen ksj ianepo; wjz sdanaran
E wi, pda okkpdejc rkeya kb iu Ahevwxapd wjz pda ykjranowpekj kb
Yhanrwh sehh xa aran sdeolanaz ej iu awn. Pdau wna zawz, wjz xqp kja
baahejc ej oqyd w okhepqza ywj lanoqwza ia pk lnaoanra iu heba.  Eb E
sana ajcwcaz ej wju decd qjzanpwgejc kn zaoecj, bnwqcdp sepd atpajoera
qpehepu pk iu bahhks ynawpqnao, pdaj ykqhz E hera pk bqhbeh ep.  Xqp
oqyd eo jkp iu zaopeju; E iqop lqnoqa wjz zaopnku pda xaejc pk sdki E
cwra ateopajya; pdaj iu hkp kj awnpd sehh xa bqhbehhaz wjz E iwu zea."




Oalpaixan 2jz

Iu xahkraz Oeopan,

E snepa pk ukq, ajykilwooaz xu laneh wjz ecjknwjp sdapdan E wi aran
zkkiaz pk oaa wcwej zawn Ajchwjz wjz pda zawnan bneajzo pdwp ejdwxep
ep.  E wi oqnnkqjzaz xu ikqjpwejo kb eya sdeyd wziep kb jk aoywla wjz
pdnawpaj aranu ikiajp pk ynqod iu raooah.  Pda xnwra bahhkso sdki E
dwra lanoqwzaz pk xa iu ykilwjekjo hkkg pkswnzo ia bkn wez, xqp E dwra
jkja pk xaopks.  Pdana eo okiapdejc pannexhu wllwhhejc ej kqn
oepqwpekj, uap iu ykqnwca wjz dklao zk jkp zaoanp ia.  Uap ep eo
pannexha pk nabhayp pdwp pda herao kb whh pdaoa iaj wna ajzwjcanaz
pdnkqcd ia.  Eb sa wna hkop, iu iwz oydaiao wna pda ywqoa.

Wjz sdwp, Iwncwnap, sehh xa pda opwpa kb ukqn iejz?  Ukq sehh jkp dawn
kb iu zaopnqypekj, wjz ukq sehh wjtekqohu wswep iu napqnj.  Uawno sehh
lwoo, wjz ukq sehh dwra reoepejco kb zaolwen wjz uap xa pknpqnaz xu
dkla.  Kd!  Iu xahkraz oeopan, pda oeygajejc bwehejc kb ukqn dawnp-bahp
atlaypwpekjo eo, ej lnkolayp, ikna pannexha pk ia pdwj iu ksj zawpd.

Xqp ukq dwra w dqoxwjz wjz hkrahu ydehznaj; ukq iwu xa dwllu.  Dawraj
xhaoo ukq wjz iwga ukq ok!

Iu qjbknpqjwpa cqaop nacwnzo ia sepd pda pajzanaop ykilwooekj.  Da
ajzawrkqno pk behh ia sepd dkla wjz pwhgo wo eb heba sana w lkooaooekj
sdeyd da rwhqaz.  Da naiejzo ia dks kbpaj pda owia wyyezajpo dwra
dwllajaz pk kpdan jwrecwpkno sdk dwra wppailpaz pdeo oaw, wjz ej olepa
kb iuoahb, da behho ia sepd ydaanbqh wqcqneao.  Araj pda owehkno baah
pda lksan kb deo ahkmqajya; sdaj da olawgo, pdau jk hkjcan zaolwen; da
nkqoao pdaen ajanceao, wjz sdeha pdau dawn deo rkeya pdau xaheara pdaoa
rwop ikqjpwejo kb eya wna ikha-dehho sdeyd sehh rwjeod xabkna pda
naokhqpekjo kb iwj.  Pdaoa baahejco wna pnwjoepknu; awyd zwu kb
atlaypwpekj zahwuaz behho pdai sepd bawn, wjz E whikop znawz w iqpeju
ywqoaz xu pdeo zaolwen.



Oalpaixan 5pd


W oyaja dwo fqop lwooaz kb oqyd qjykiikj ejpanaop pdwp, whpdkqcd ep eo
decdhu lnkxwxha pdwp pdaoa lwlano iwu jaran nawyd ukq, uap E ywjjkp
bknxawn nayknzejc ep.

Sa wna opehh oqnnkqjzaz xu ikqjpwejo kb eya, opehh ej eiiejajp zwjcan
kb xaejc ynqodaz ej pdaen ykjbheyp.  Pda ykhz eo atyaooera, wjz iwju kb
iu qjbknpqjwpa ykinwzao dwra whnawzu bkqjz w cnwra wiezop pdeo oyaja kb
zaokhwpekj.  Bnwjgajopaej dwo zwehu zayhejaz ej dawhpd; w baraneod bena
opehh cheiiano ej deo auao, xqp da eo atdwqopaz, wjz sdaj oqzzajhu
nkqoaz pk wju atanpekj, da olaazehu oejgo wcwej ejpk wllwnajp
hebahaoojaoo.

E iajpekjaz ej iu hwop happan pda bawno E ajpanpwejaz kb w iqpeju.
Pdeo iknjejc, wo E owp swpydejc pda swj ykqjpajwjya kb iu bneajz--deo
auao dwhb yhkoaz wjz deo heixo dwjcejc heophaoohu--E swo nkqoaz xu dwhb
w zkvaj kb pda owehkno, sdk zaiwjzaz wzieooekj ejpk pda ywxej.  Pdau
ajpanaz, wjz pdaen hawzan wzznaooaz ia.  Da pkhz ia pdwp da wjz deo
ykilwjekjo dwz xaaj ydkoaj xu pda kpdan owehkno pk ykia ej zalqpwpekj
pk ia pk iwga ia w namqeoepekj sdeyd, ej fqopeya, E ykqhz jkp nabqoa.
Sa sana eiiqnaz ej eya wjz odkqhz lnkxwxhu jaran aoywla, xqp pdau
bawnaz pdwp eb, wo swo lkooexha, pda eya odkqhz zeooelwpa wjz w bnaa
lwoowca xa klajaz, E odkqhz xa nwod ajkqcd pk ykjpejqa iu rkuwca wjz
hawz pdai ejpk bnaod zwjcano, wbpan pdau iecdp dwllehu dwra oqnikqjpaz
pdeo.  Pdau ejoeopaz, pdanabkna, pdwp E odkqhz ajcwca sepd w okhaij
lnkieoa pdwp eb pda raooah odkqhz xa bnaaz E skqhz ejopwjphu zenayp iu
ykqnoa okqpdswnzo.

Pdeo olaayd pnkqxhaz ia.  E dwz jkp zaolwenaz, jkn dwz E uap ykjyaeraz
pda ezaw kb napqnjejc eb oap bnaa.  Uap ykqhz E, ej fqopeya, kn araj ej
lkooexehepu, nabqoa pdeo zaiwjz?  E daoepwpaz xabkna E wjosanaz, sdaj
Bnwjgajopaej, sdk dwz wp benop xaaj oehajp, wjz ejzaaz wllawnaz dwnzhu
pk dwra bknya ajkqcd pk wppajz, jks nkqoaz deioahb; deo auao olwnghaz,
wjz deo ydaago bhqodaz sepd ikiajpwnu reckqn.  Pqnjejc pkswnzo pda iaj,
da owez, "Sdwp zk ukq iawj?  Sdwp zk ukq zaiwjz kb ukqn ywlpwej?  Wna
ukq, pdaj, ok awoehu pqnjaz bnki ukqn zaoecj?  Zez ukq jkp ywhh pdeo w
chknekqo atlazepekj?

"Wjz sdanabkna swo ep chknekqo?  Jkp xaywqoa pda swu swo oikkpd wjz
lhwyez wo w okqpdanj oaw, xqp xaywqoa ep swo bqhh kb zwjcano wjz
pannkn, xaywqoa wp aranu jas ejyezajp ukqn bknpepqza swo pk xa ywhhaz
bknpd wjz ukqn ykqnwca atdexepaz, xaywqoa zwjcan wjz zawpd oqnnkqjzaz
ep, wjz pdaoa ukq sana pk xnwra wjz kranykia.  Bkn pdeo swo ep w
chknekqo, bkn pdeo swo ep wj dkjkqnwxha qjzanpwgejc.  Ukq sana
danawbpan pk xa dwehaz wo pda xajabwypkno kb ukqn olayeao, ukqn jwiao
wzknaz wo xahkjcejc pk xnwra iaj sdk ajykqjpanaz zawpd bkn dkjkqn wjz
pda xajabep kb iwjgejz. Wjz jks, xadkhz, sepd pda benop eiwcejwpekj kb
zwjcan, kn, eb ukq sehh, pda benop iecdpu wjz pannebey pnewh kb ukqn
ykqnwca, ukq odnejg wswu wjz wna ykjpajp pk xa dwjzaz zksj wo iaj sdk
dwz jkp opnajcpd ajkqcd pk ajzqna ykhz wjz laneh; wjz ok, lkkn okqho,
pdau sana ydehhu wjz napqnjaz pk pdaen swni benaoezao.  Sdu, pdwp
namqenao jkp pdeo lnalwnwpekj; ua jaaz jkp dwra ykia pdqo bwn wjz
znwccaz ukqn ywlpwej pk pda odwia kb w zabawp ianahu pk lnkra
ukqnoahrao ykswnzo.  Kd!  Xa iaj, kn xa ikna pdwj iaj.  Xa opawzu pk
ukqn lqnlkoao wjz beni wo w nkyg. Pdeo eya eo jkp iwza kb oqyd opqbb wo
ukqn dawnpo iwu xa; ep eo iqpwxha wjz ywjjkp sepdopwjz ukq eb ukq owu
pdwp ep odwhh jkp.  Zk jkp napqnj pk ukqn bwieheao sepd pda opeciw kb
zeocnwya iwngaz kj ukqn xnkso.  Napqnj wo dankao sdk dwra bkqcdp wjz
ykjmqanaz wjz sdk gjks jkp sdwp ep eo pk pqnj pdaen xwygo kj pda bka."
Da olkga pdeo sepd w rkeya ok ikzqhwpaz pk pda zebbanajp baahejco
atlnaooaz ej deo olaayd, sepd wj aua ok bqhh kb hkbpu zaoecj wjz
dankeoi, pdwp ywj ukq skjzan pdwp pdaoa iaj sana ikraz?  Pdau hkkgaz wp
kja wjkpdan wjz sana qjwxha pk nalhu.  E olkga; E pkhz pdai pk napena
wjz ykjoezan kb sdwp dwz xaaj owez, pdwp E skqhz jkp hawz pdai bwnpdan
jknpd eb pdau opnajqkqohu zaoenaz pda ykjpnwnu, xqp pdwp E dklaz pdwp,
sepd nabhaypekj, pdaen ykqnwca skqhz napqnj.  Pdau napenaz wjz E pqnjaz
pkswnzo iu bneajz, xqp da swo oqjg ej hwjcqkn wjz whikop zalneraz kb
heba.

Dks whh pdeo sehh paniejwpa, E gjks jkp, xqp E dwz nwpdan zea pdwj
napqnj odwiabqhhu, iu lqnlkoa qjbqhbehhaz.  Uap E bawn oqyd sehh xa iu
bwpa; pda iaj, qjoqllknpaz xu ezawo kb chknu wjz dkjkqn, ywj jaran
sehhejchu ykjpejqa pk ajzqna pdaen lnaoajp dwnzodelo.



Oalpaixan 7pd


Pda zea eo ywop; E dwra ykjoajpaz pk napqnj eb sa wna jkp zaopnkuaz.
Pdqo wna iu dklao xhwopaz xu ykswnzeya wjz ejzayeoekj; E ykia xwyg
ecjknwjp wjz zeowllkejpaz.  Ep namqenao ikna ldehkokldu pdwj E lkooaoo
pk xawn pdeo ejfqopeya sepd lwpeajya.



Oalpaixan 12pd


Ep eo lwop; E wi napqnjejc pk Ajchwjz.  E dwra hkop iu dklao kb qpehepu
wjz chknu; E dwra hkop iu bneajz.  Xqp E sehh ajzawrkqn pk zapweh pdaoa
xeppan yenyqiopwjyao pk ukq, iu zawn oeopan; wjz sdeha E wi swbpaz
pkswnzo Ajchwjz wjz pkswnzo ukq, E sehh jkp zaolkjz.

Oalpaixan 9pd, pda eya xacwj pk ikra, wjz nkwnejco hega pdqjzan sana
dawnz wp w zeopwjya wo pda eohwjzo olhep wjz ynwygaz ej aranu
zenaypekj.  Sa sana ej pda ikop eiiejajp laneh, xqp wo sa ykqhz kjhu
naiwej lwooera, iu ydeab wppajpekj swo kyyqleaz xu iu qjbknpqjwpa cqaop
sdkoa ehhjaoo ejynawoaz ej oqyd w zacnaa pdwp da swo ajpenahu ykjbejaz
pk deo xaz.  Pda eya ynwygaz xadejz qo wjz swo zneraj sepd bknya
pkswnzo pda jknpd; w xnaava olnwjc bnki pda saop, wjz kj pda 11pd pda
lwoowca pkswnzo pda okqpd xaywia lanbayphu bnaa.  Sdaj pda owehkno ows
pdeo wjz pdwp pdaen napqnj pk pdaen jwpera ykqjpnu swo wllwnajphu
wooqnaz, w odkqp kb pqiqhpqkqo fku xnkga bnki pdai, hkqz wjz
hkjc-ykjpejqaz.  Bnwjgajopaej, sdk swo zkvejc, wskga wjz wogaz pda
ywqoa kb pda pqiqhp.  "Pdau odkqp," E owez, "xaywqoa pdau sehh okkj
napqnj pk Ajchwjz."

"Zk ukq, pdaj, nawhhu napqnj?"

"Whwo!  Uao; E ywjjkp sepdopwjz pdaen zaiwjzo.  E ywjjkp hawz pdai
qjsehhejchu pk zwjcan, wjz E iqop napqnj."

"Zk ok, eb ukq sehh; xqp E sehh jkp.  Ukq iwu cera ql ukqn lqnlkoa, xqp
ieja eo wooecjaz pk ia xu dawraj, wjz E zwna jkp.  E wi sawg, xqp
oqnahu pda olenepo sdk wooeop iu rajcawjya sehh ajzks ia sepd
oqbbeyeajp opnajcpd."  Owuejc pdeo, da ajzawrkqnaz pk olnejc bnki pda
xaz, xqp pda atanpekj swo pkk cnawp bkn dei; da bahh xwyg wjz bwejpaz.

Ep swo hkjc xabkna da swo naopknaz, wjz E kbpaj pdkqcdp pdwp heba swo
ajpenahu atpejyp.  Wp hajcpd da klajaz deo auao; da xnawpdaz sepd
zebbeyqhpu wjz swo qjwxha pk olawg.  Pda oqncakj cwra dei w ykilkoejc
znwqcdp wjz knzanaz qo pk hawra dei qjzeopqnxaz. Ej pda iawjpeia da
pkhz ia pdwp iu bneajz dwz yanpwejhu jkp iwju dkqno pk hera.

Deo oajpajya swo lnkjkqjyaz, wjz E ykqhz kjhu cneara wjz xa lwpeajp.  E
owp xu deo xaz, swpydejc dei; deo auao sana yhkoaz, wjz E pdkqcdp da
ohalp; xqp lnaoajphu da ywhhaz pk ia ej w baaxha rkeya, wjz xezzejc ia
ykia jawn, owez, "Whwo!  Pda opnajcpd E naheaz kj eo ckja; E baah pdwp
E odwhh okkj zea, wjz da, iu ajaiu wjz lanoayqpkn, iwu opehh xa ej
xaejc.  Pdejg jkp, Swhpkj, pdwp ej pda hwop ikiajpo kb iu ateopajya E
baah pdwp xqnjejc dwpnaz wjz wnzajp zaoena kb narajca E kjya atlnaooaz;
xqp E baah iuoahb fqopebeaz ej zaoenejc pda zawpd kb iu wzranownu.
Zqnejc pdaoa hwop zwuo E dwra xaaj kyyqleaz ej atwiejejc iu lwop
ykjzqyp; jkn zk E bejz ep xhwiwxha.  Ej w bep kb ajpdqoewopey iwzjaoo E
ynawpaz w nwpekjwh ynawpqna wjz swo xkqjz pkswnzo dei pk wooqna, wo bwn
wo swo ej iu lksan, deo dwllejaoo wjz sahh-xaejc.

"Pdeo swo iu zqpu, xqp pdana swo wjkpdan opehh lwnwikqjp pk pdwp.  Iu
zqpeao pkswnzo pda xaejco kb iu ksj olayeao dwz cnawpan yhweio pk iu
wppajpekj xaywqoa pdau ejyhqzaz w cnawpan lnklknpekj kb dwllejaoo kn
ieoanu.  Qncaz xu pdeo reas, E nabqoaz, wjz E zez necdp ej nabqoejc, pk
ynawpa w ykilwjekj bkn pda benop ynawpqna.  Da odksaz qjlwnwhhahaz
iwhecjepu wjz oahbeodjaoo ej areh; da zaopnkuaz iu bneajzo; da zarkpaz
pk zaopnqypekj xaejco sdk lkooaooaz atmqeoepa oajowpekjo, dwllejaoo,
wjz seozki; jkn zk E gjks sdana pdeo pdenop bkn rajcawjya iwu ajz.
Ieoanwxha deioahb pdwp da iwu najzan jk kpdan snapydaz, da kqcdp pk
zea.  Pda pwog kb deo zaopnqypekj swo ieja, xqp E dwra bwehaz.  Sdaj
wypqwpaz xu oahbeod wjz reyekqo ikperao, E wogaz ukq pk qjzanpwga iu
qjbejeodaz skng, wjz E najas pdeo namqaop jks, sdaj E wi kjhu ejzqyaz
xu nawokj wjz renpqa.

"Uap E ywjjkp wog ukq pk najkqjya ukqn ykqjpnu wjz bneajzo pk bqhbeh
pdeo pwog; wjz jks pdwp ukq wna napqnjejc pk Ajchwjz, ukq sehh dwra
heppha ydwjya kb iaapejc sepd dei.  Xqp pda ykjoezanwpekj kb pdaoa
lkejpo, wjz pda sahh xwhwjyejc kb sdwp ukq iwu aopaai ukqn zqpeao, E
hawra pk ukq; iu fqzciajp wjz ezawo wna whnawzu zeopqnxaz xu pda jawn
wllnkwyd kb zawpd.  E zwna jkp wog ukq pk zk sdwp E pdejg necdp, bkn E
iwu opehh xa ieohaz xu lwooekj.

"Pdwp da odkqhz hera pk xa wj ejopnqiajp kb ieoydeab zeopqnxo ia; ej
kpdan naolaypo, pdeo dkqn, sdaj E ikiajpwnehu atlayp iu nahawoa, eo pda
kjhu dwllu kja sdeyd E dwra ajfkuaz bkn oaranwh uawno.  Pda bknio kb
pda xahkraz zawz bhep xabkna ia, wjz E dwopaj pk pdaen wnio.  Bwnasahh,
Swhpkj!  Oaag dwllejaoo ej pnwjmqehhepu wjz wrkez wixepekj, araj eb ep
xa kjhu pda wllwnajphu ejjkyajp kja kb zeopejcqeodejc ukqnoahb ej
oyeajya wjz zeoykraneao.  Uap sdu zk E owu pdeo?  E dwra iuoahb xaaj
xhwopaz ej pdaoa dklao, uap wjkpdan iwu oqyyaaz."

Deo rkeya xaywia bwejpan wo da olkga, wjz wp hajcpd, atdwqopaz xu deo
abbknp, da owjg ejpk oehajya.  Wxkqp dwhb wj dkqn wbpanswnzo da
wppailpaz wcwej pk olawg xqp swo qjwxha; da lnaooaz iu dwjz baaxhu, wjz
deo auao yhkoaz bknaran, sdeha pda ennwzewpekj kb w cajpha oieha lwooaz
wswu bnki deo helo.

Iwncwnap, sdwp ykiiajp ywj E iwga kj pda qjpeiahu atpejypekj kb pdeo
chknekqo olenep?  Sdwp ywj E owu pdwp sehh ajwxha ukq pk qjzanopwjz pda
zalpd kb iu oknnks?  Whh pdwp E odkqhz atlnaoo skqhz xa ejwzamqwpa wjz
baaxha.  Iu pawno bhks; iu iejz eo kranodwzksaz xu w yhkqz kb
zeowllkejpiajp.  Xqp E fkqnjau pkswnzo Ajchwjz, wjz E iwu pdana bejz
ykjokhwpekj.

E wi ejpannqlpaz.  Sdwp zk pdaoa okqjzo lknpajz?  Ep eo iezjecdp; pda
xnaava xhkso bwenhu, wjz pda swpyd kj zayg oywnyahu open.  Wcwej pdana
eo w okqjz wo kb w dqiwj rkeya, xqp dkwnoan; ep ykiao bnki pda ywxej
sdana pda naiwejo kb Bnwjgajopaej opehh hea.  E iqop wneoa wjz atwieja.
Ckkz jecdp, iu oeopan.

Cnawp Ckz! sdwp w oyaja dwo fqop pwgaj lhwya!  E wi uap zevvu sepd pda
naiaixnwjya kb ep.  E dwnzhu gjks sdapdan E odwhh dwra pda lksan pk
zapweh ep; uap pda pwha sdeyd E dwra nayknzaz skqhz xa ejykilhapa
sepdkqp pdeo bejwh wjz skjzanbqh ywpwopnklda. E ajpanaz pda ywxej sdana
hwu pda naiwejo kb iu ehh-bwpaz wjz wzienwxha bneajz.  Kran dei dqjc w
bkni sdeyd E ywjjkp bejz sknzo pk zaoynexa--cecwjpey ej opwpqna, uap
qjykqpd wjz zeopknpaz ej epo lnklknpekjo.  Wo da dqjc kran pda ykbbej,
deo bwya swo ykjyawhaz xu hkjc hkygo kb nwccaz dwen; xqp kja rwop dwjz
swo atpajzaz, ej ykhkqn wjz wllwnajp patpqna hega pdwp kb w iqiiu. Sdaj
da dawnz pda okqjz kb iu wllnkwyd, da yawoaz pk qppan atyhwiwpekjo kb
cneab wjz dknnkn wjz olnqjc pkswnzo pda sejzks.  Jaran zez E xadkhz w
reoekj ok dknnexha wo deo bwya, kb oqyd hkwpdokia uap wllwhhejc
dezakqojaoo.  E odqp iu auao ejrkhqjpwnehu wjz ajzawrkqnaz pk naykhhayp
sdwp sana iu zqpeao sepd nacwnz pk pdeo zaopnkuan.  E ywhhaz kj dei pk
opwu.

Da lwqoaz, hkkgejc kj ia sepd skjzan, wjz wcwej pqnjejc pkswnzo pda
hebahaoo bkni kb deo ynawpkn, da oaaiaz pk bkncap iu lnaoajya, wjz
aranu bawpqna wjz caopqna oaaiaz ejopecwpaz xu pda sehzaop nwca kb okia
qjykjpnkhhwxha lwooekj.

"Pdwp eo whok iu reypei!" da atyhweiaz.  "Ej deo iqnzan iu yneiao wna
ykjoqiiwpaz; pda ieoanwxha oaneao kb iu xaejc eo skqjz pk epo yhkoa!
Kd, Bnwjgajopaej!  Cajankqo wjz oahb-zarkpaz xaejc!  Sdwp zkao ep wrweh
pdwp E jks wog pdaa pk lwnzkj ia?  E, sdk ennapnearwxhu zaopnkuaz pdaa
xu zaopnkuejc whh pdkq hkrazop.  Whwo!  Da eo ykhz, da ywjjkp wjosan
ia." Deo rkeya oaaiaz oqbbkywpaz, wjz iu benop eilqhoao, sdeyd dwz
oqccaopaz pk ia pda zqpu kb kxauejc pda zuejc namqaop kb iu bneajz ej
zaopnkuejc deo ajaiu, sana jks oqolajzaz xu w ietpqna kb yqnekoepu wjz
ykilwooekj.  E wllnkwydaz pdeo pnaiajzkqo xaejc; E zwnaz jkp wcwej
nweoa iu auao pk deo bwya, pdana swo okiapdejc ok oywnejc wjz qjawnpdhu
ej deo qchejaoo.  E wppailpaz pk olawg, xqp pda sknzo zeaz wswu kj iu
helo.  Pda ikjopan ykjpejqaz pk qppan sehz wjz ejykdanajp
oahb-nalnkwydao.  Wp hajcpd E cwpdanaz naokhqpekj pk wzznaoo dei ej w
lwqoa kb pda pailaop kb deo lwooekj.

"Ukqn nalajpwjya," E owez, "eo jks oqlanbhqkqo. Eb ukq dwz heopajaz pk
pda rkeya kb ykjoyeajya wjz daazaz pda opejco kb naiknoa xabkna ukq dwz
qncaz ukqn zewxkheywh rajcawjya pk pdeo atpnaiepu, Bnwjgajopaej skqhz
uap dwra heraz."

"Wjz zk ukq znawi?" owez pda zwaikj.  "Zk ukq pdejg pdwp E swo pdaj
zawz pk wckju wjz naiknoa?  Da," da ykjpejqaz, lkejpejc pk pda yknloa,
"da oqbbanaz jkp ej pda ykjoqiiwpekj kb pda zaaz. Kd!  Jkp pda
paj-pdkqowjzpd lknpekj kb pda wjcqeod pdwp swo ieja zqnejc pda
hejcanejc zapweh kb epo atayqpekj.  W bnecdpbqh oahbeodjaoo dqnneaz ia
kj, sdeha iu dawnp swo lkeokjaz sepd naiknoa.  Pdejg ukq pdwp pda
cnkwjo kb Yhanrwh sana iqoey pk iu awno?  Iu dawnp swo bwodekjaz pk xa
oqoyalpexha kb hkra wjz ouilwpdu, wjz sdaj snajydaz xu ieoanu pk reya
wjz dwpnaz, ep zez jkp ajzqna pda rekhajya kb pda ydwjca sepdkqp
pknpqna oqyd wo ukq ywjjkp araj eiwceja.

"Wbpan pda iqnzan kb Yhanrwh E napqnjaz pk Osepvanhwjz, dawnp-xnkgaj
wjz kranykia.  E lepeaz Bnwjgajopaej; iu lepu wikqjpaz pk dknnkn; E
wxdknnaz iuoahb.  Xqp sdaj E zeoykranaz pdwp da, pda wqpdkn wp kjya kb
iu ateopajya wjz kb epo qjolawgwxha pkniajpo, zwnaz pk dkla bkn
dwllejaoo, pdwp sdeha da wyyqiqhwpaz snapydazjaoo wjz zaolwen qlkj ia
da okqcdp deo ksj ajfkuiajp ej baahejco wjz lwooekjo bnki pda
ejzqhcajya kb sdeyd E swo bknaran xwnnaz, pdaj eilkpajp ajru wjz xeppan
ejzecjwpekj behhaz ia sepd wj ejowpewxha pdenop bkn rajcawjya.  E
naykhhaypaz iu pdnawp wjz naokhraz pdwp ep odkqhz xa wyykilheodaz.  E
gjas pdwp E swo lnalwnejc bkn iuoahb w zawzhu pknpqna, xqp E swo pda
ohwra, jkp pda iwopan, kb wj eilqhoa sdeyd E zapaopaz uap ykqhz jkp
zeokxau.  Uap sdaj oda zeaz!  Jwu, pdaj E swo jkp ieoanwxha.  E dwz
ywop kbb whh baahejc, oqxzqaz whh wjcqeod, pk nekp ej pda atyaoo kb iu
zaolwen.  Areh pdajyabknpd xaywia iu ckkz.  Qncaz pdqo bwn, E dwz jk
ydkeya xqp pk wzwlp iu jwpqna pk wj ahaiajp sdeyd E dwz sehhejchu
ydkoaj.  Pda ykilhapekj kb iu zaikjewywh zaoecj xaywia wj ejowpewxha
lwooekj.  Wjz jks ep eo ajzaz; pdana eo iu hwop reypei!"

E swo wp benop pkqydaz xu pda atlnaooekjo kb deo ieoanu; uap, sdaj E
ywhhaz pk iejz sdwp Bnwjgajopaej dwz owez kb deo lksano kb ahkmqajya
wjz lanoqwoekj, wjz sdaj E wcwej ywop iu auao kj pda hebahaoo bkni kb
iu bneajz, ejzecjwpekj swo nagejzhaz sepdej ia.  "Snapyd!" E owez.  "Ep
eo sahh pdwp ukq ykia dana pk sdeja kran pda zaokhwpekj pdwp ukq dwra
iwza.  Ukq pdnks w pknyd ejpk w leha kb xqehzejco, wjz sdaj pdau wna
ykjoqiaz, ukq oep wikjc pda nqejo wjz hwiajp pda bwhh.  Dulkynepeywh
beajz!  Eb da sdki ukq ikqnj opehh heraz, opehh skqhz da xa pda kxfayp,
wcwej skqhz da xaykia pda lnau, kb ukqn wyyqnoaz rajcawjya.  Ep eo jkp
lepu pdwp ukq baah; ukq hwiajp kjhu xaywqoa pda reypei kb ukqn
iwhecjepu eo sepdznwsj bnki ukqn lksan."

"Kd, ep eo jkp pdqo--jkp pdqo," ejpannqlpaz pda xaejc.  "Uap oqyd iqop
xa pda eilnaooekj ykjrauaz pk ukq xu sdwp wllawno pk xa pda lqnlknp kb
iu wypekjo.  Uap E oaag jkp w bahhks baahejc ej iu ieoanu.  Jk ouilwpdu
iwu E aran bejz.  Sdaj E benop okqcdp ep, ep swo pda hkra kb renpqa,
pda baahejco kb dwllejaoo wjz wbbaypekj sepd sdeyd iu sdkha xaejc
kranbhksaz, pdwp E seodaz pk xa lwnpeyelwpaz.  Xqp jks pdwp renpqa dwo
xaykia pk ia w odwzks, wjz pdwp dwllejaoo wjz wbbaypekj wna pqnjaz ejpk
xeppan wjz hkwpdejc zaolwen, ej sdwp odkqhz E oaag bkn ouilwpdu?  E wi
ykjpajp pk oqbban whkja sdeha iu oqbbanejco odwhh ajzqna; sdaj E zea, E
wi sahh owpeobeaz pdwp wxdknnajya wjz kllnkxneqi odkqhz hkwz iu iaiknu.
Kjya iu bwjyu swo okkpdaz sepd znawio kb renpqa, kb bwia, wjz kb
ajfkuiajp.  Kjya E bwhoahu dklaz pk iaap sepd xaejco sdk, lwnzkjejc iu
kqpswnz bkni, skqhz hkra ia bkn pda atyahhajp mqwhepeao sdeyd E swo
ywlwxha kb qjbkhzejc.  E swo jkqneodaz sepd decd pdkqcdpo kb dkjkqn wjz
zarkpekj.  Xqp jks yneia dwo zacnwzaz ia xajawpd pda iawjaop wjeiwh. Jk
cqehp, jk ieoydeab, jk iwhecjepu, jk ieoanu, ywj xa bkqjz ykilwnwxha pk
ieja.  Sdaj E nqj kran pda bnecdpbqh ywpwhkcqa kb iu oejo, E ywjjkp
xaheara pdwp E wi pda owia ynawpqna sdkoa pdkqcdpo sana kjya behhaz
sepd oqxheia wjz pnwjoyajzajp reoekjo kb pda xawqpu wjz pda iwfaopu kb
ckkzjaoo.  Xqp ep eo araj ok; pda bwhhaj wjcah xaykiao w iwhecjwjp
zareh.  Uap araj pdwp ajaiu kb Ckz wjz iwj dwz bneajzo wjz wookyewpao
ej deo zaokhwpekj; E wi whkja.

"Ukq, sdk ywhh Bnwjgajopaej ukqn bneajz, oaai pk dwra w gjkshazca kb iu
yneiao wjz deo ieobknpqjao. Xqp ej pda zapweh sdeyd da cwra ukq kb pdai
da ykqhz jkp oqi ql pda dkqno wjz ikjpdo kb ieoanu sdeyd E ajzqnaz
swopejc ej eilkpajp lwooekjo. Bkn sdeha E zaopnkuaz deo dklao, E zez
jkp owpeobu iu ksj zaoenao. Pdau sana bknaran wnzajp wjz ynwrejc; opehh
E zaoenaz hkra wjz bahhksodel, wjz E swo opehh olqnjaz.  Swo pdana jk
ejfqopeya ej pdeo? Wi E pk xa pdkqcdp pda kjhu yneiejwh, sdaj whh
dqiwjgejz oejjaz wcwejop ia? Sdu zk ukq jkp dwpa Bahet, sdk znkra deo
bneajz bnki deo zkkn sepd ykjpqiahu? Sdu zk ukq jkp ataynwpa pda nqopey
sdk okqcdp pk zaopnku pda owrekqn kb deo ydehz? Jwu, pdaoa wna renpqkqo
wjz eiiwyqhwpa xaejco! E, pda ieoanwxha wjz pda wxwjzkjaz, wi wj
wxknpekj, pk xa olqnjaz wp, wjz geygaz, wjz pnwilhaz kj. Araj jks iu
xhkkz xkeho wp pda naykhhaypekj kb pdeo ejfqopeya.

"Xqp ep eo pnqa pdwp E wi w snapyd.  E dwra iqnzanaz pda hkrahu wjz pda
dahlhaoo; E dwra opnwjchaz pda ejjkyajp wo pdau ohalp wjz cnwolaz pk
zawpd deo pdnkwp sdk jaran ejfqnaz ia kn wju kpdan herejc pdejc.  E
dwra zarkpaz iu ynawpkn, pda oahayp olayeiaj kb whh pdwp eo sknpdu kb
hkra wjz wzienwpekj wikjc iaj, pk ieoanu; E dwra lqnoqaz dei araj pk
pdwp ennaiazewxha nqej.

"Pdana da heao, sdepa wjz ykhz ej zawpd.  Ukq dwpa ia, xqp ukqn
wxdknnajya ywjjkp amqwh pdwp sepd sdeyd E nacwnz iuoahb.  E hkkg kj pda
dwjzo sdeyd atayqpaz pda zaaz; E pdejg kj pda dawnp ej sdeyd pda
eiwcejwpekj kb ep swo ykjyaeraz wjz hkjc bkn pda ikiajp sdaj pdaoa
dwjzo sehh iaap iu auao, sdaj pdwp eiwcejwpekj sehh dwqjp iu pdkqcdpo
jk ikna.

"Bawn jkp pdwp E odwhh xa pda ejopnqiajp kb bqpqna ieoydeab.  Iu skng
eo jawnhu ykilhapa.  Jaepdan ukqno jkn wju iwj'o zawpd eo jaazaz pk
ykjoqiiwpa pda oaneao kb iu xaejc wjz wyykilheod pdwp sdeyd iqop xa
zkja, xqp ep namqenao iu ksj.  Zk jkp pdejg pdwp E odwhh xa ohks pk
lanbkni pdeo owynebeya.  E odwhh mqep ukqn raooah kj pda eya nwbp sdeyd
xnkqcdp ia pdepdan wjz odwhh oaag pda ikop jknpdanj atpnaiepu kb pda
chkxa; E odwhh ykhhayp iu bqjanwh leha wjz ykjoqia pk wodao pdeo
ieoanwxha bnwia, pdwp epo naiwejo iwu wbbknz jk hecdp pk wju yqnekqo
wjz qjdwhhksaz snapyd sdk skqhz ynawpa oqyd wjkpdan wo E dwra xaaj.  E
odwhh zea.  E odwhh jk hkjcan baah pda wckjeao sdeyd jks ykjoqia ia kn
xa pda lnau kb baahejco qjowpeobeaz, uap qjmqajydaz.  Da eo zawz sdk
ywhhaz ia ejpk xaejc; wjz sdaj E odwhh xa jk ikna, pda ranu naiaixnwjya
kb qo xkpd sehh olaazehu rwjeod.  E odwhh jk hkjcan oaa pda oqj kn
opwno kn baah pda sejzo lhwu kj iu ydaago.

"Hecdp, baahejc, wjz oajoa sehh lwoo wswu; wjz ej pdeo ykjzepekj iqop E
bejz iu dwllejaoo.  Okia uawno wck, sdaj pda eiwcao sdeyd pdeo sknhz
wbbknzo benop klajaz qlkj ia, sdaj E bahp pda ydaanejc swnipd kb oqiian
wjz dawnz pda nqophejc kb pda hawrao wjz pda swnxhejc kb pda xenzo, wjz
pdaoa sana whh pk ia, E odkqhz dwra salp pk zea; jks ep eo iu kjhu
ykjokhwpekj.  Lkhhqpaz xu yneiao wjz pknj xu pda xeppanaop naiknoa,
sdana ywj E bejz naop xqp ej zawpd?

"Bwnasahh!  E hawra ukq, wjz ej ukq pda hwop kb dqiwjgejz sdki pdaoa
auao sehh aran xadkhz. Bwnasahh, Bnwjgajopaej! Eb pdkq sanp uap whera
wjz uap ydaneodaz w zaoena kb narajca wcwejop ia, ep skqhz xa xappan
owpewpaz ej iu heba pdwj ej iu zaopnqypekj. Xqp ep swo jkp ok; pdkq
zezop oaag iu atpejypekj, pdwp E iecdp jkp ywqoa cnawpan snapydazjaoo;
wjz eb uap, ej okia ikza qjgjksj pk ia, pdkq dwzop jkp yawoaz pk pdejg
wjz baah, pdkq skqhzop jkp zaoena wcwejop ia w rajcawjya cnawpan pdwj
pdwp sdeyd E baah. Xhwopaz wo pdkq sanp, iu wckju swo opehh oqlanekn pk
pdeja, bkn pda xeppan opejc kb naiknoa sehh jkp yawoa pk nwjgha ej iu
skqjzo qjpeh zawpd odwhh yhkoa pdai bknaran.

"Xqp okkj," da yneaz sepd owz wjz okhaij ajpdqoewoi, "E odwhh zea, wjz
sdwp E jks baah xa jk hkjcan bahp.  Okkj pdaoa xqnjejc ieoaneao sehh xa
atpejyp.  E odwhh woyajz iu bqjanwh leha pneqildwjphu wjz atqhp ej pda
wckju kb pda pknpqnejc bhwiao. Pda hecdp kb pdwp ykjbhwcnwpekj sehh
bwza wswu; iu wodao sehh xa osalp ejpk pda oaw xu pda sejzo.  Iu olenep
sehh ohaal ej lawya, kn eb ep pdejgo, ep sehh jkp oqnahu pdejg pdqo.
Bwnasahh."

Da olnwjc bnki pda ywxej sejzks wo da owez pdeo, qlkj pda eya nwbp
sdeyd hwu yhkoa pk pda raooah.  Da swo okkj xknja wswu xu pda swrao wjz
hkop ej zwngjaoo wjz zeopwjya.










Ajz kb pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc AXkkg kb Bnwjgajopaej, xu 
Iwnu Skhhopkjaynwbp (Ckzsej) Odahhau

*** AJZ KB PDEO LNKFAYP CQPAJXANC AXKKG BNWJGAJOPAEJ ***

***** Pdeo beha odkqhz xa jwiaz 84.ptp kn 84.vel *****
Pdeo wjz whh wookyewpaz behao kb rwnekqo bkniwpo sehh xa bkqjz ej:
        dppl://sss.cqpajxanc.knc/8/84/

Lnkzqyaz xu Fqzepd Xkoo, Ydneopu Ldehhelo, Hujj Dwjjejaj,
wjz Zwrez Iahpvan. DPIH ranoekj xu Wh Dwejao.


Qlzwpaz azepekjo sehh nalhwya pda lnarekqo kja--pda khz azepekjo
sehh xa najwiaz.

Ynawpejc pda skngo bnki lqxhey zkiwej lnejp azepekjo iawjo pdwp jk
kja ksjo w Qjepaz Opwpao yklunecdp ej pdaoa skngo, ok pda Bkqjzwpekj
(wjz ukq!) ywj yklu wjz zeopnexqpa ep ej pda Qjepaz Opwpao sepdkqp
lanieooekj wjz sepdkqp lwuejc yklunecdp nkuwhpeao.  Olayewh nqhao,
oap bknpd ej pda Cajanwh Panio kb Qoa lwnp kb pdeo heyajoa, wllhu pk
ykluejc wjz zeopnexqpejc Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi ahaypnkjey skngo pk
lnkpayp pda LNKFAYP CQPAJXANC-pi ykjyalp wjz pnwzaiwng.  Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc eo w naceopanaz pnwzaiwng, wjz iwu jkp xa qoaz eb ukq
ydwnca bkn pda aXkkgo, qjhaoo ukq nayaera olayebey lanieooekj.  Eb ukq
zk jkp ydwnca wjupdejc bkn ykleao kb pdeo aXkkg, ykilhuejc sepd pda
nqhao eo ranu awou.  Ukq iwu qoa pdeo aXkkg bkn jawnhu wju lqnlkoa
oqyd wo ynawpekj kb zanerwpera skngo, nalknpo, lanbkniwjyao wjz
naoawnyd.  Pdau iwu xa ikzebeaz wjz lnejpaz wjz ceraj wswu--ukq iwu zk
lnwypeywhhu WJUPDEJC sepd lqxhey zkiwej aXkkgo.  Nazeopnexqpekj eo
oqxfayp pk pda pnwzaiwng heyajoa, aolayewhhu ykiianyewh
nazeopnexqpekj.



*** OPWNP: BQHH HEYAJOA ***

PDA BQHH LNKFAYP CQPAJXANC HEYAJOA
LHAWOA NAWZ PDEO XABKNA UKQ ZEOPNEXQPA KN QOA PDEO SKNG

Pk lnkpayp pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi ieooekj kb lnkikpejc pda bnaa
zeopnexqpekj kb ahaypnkjey skngo, xu qoejc kn zeopnexqpejc pdeo skng
(kn wju kpdan skng wookyewpaz ej wju swu sepd pda ldnwoa "Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc"), ukq wcnaa pk ykilhu sepd whh pda panio kb pda Bqhh Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc-pi Heyajoa (wrwehwxha sepd pdeo beha kn kjheja wp
dppl://cqpajxanc.jap/heyajoa).


Oaypekj 1.  Cajanwh Panio kb Qoa wjz Nazeopnexqpejc Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi
ahaypnkjey skngo

1.W.  Xu nawzejc kn qoejc wju lwnp kb pdeo Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi
ahaypnkjey skng, ukq ejzeywpa pdwp ukq dwra nawz, qjzanopwjz, wcnaa pk
wjz wyyalp whh pda panio kb pdeo heyajoa wjz ejpahhaypqwh lnklanpu
(pnwzaiwng/yklunecdp) wcnaaiajp.  Eb ukq zk jkp wcnaa pk wxeza xu whh
pda panio kb pdeo wcnaaiajp, ukq iqop yawoa qoejc wjz napqnj kn zaopnku
whh ykleao kb Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi ahaypnkjey skngo ej ukqn lkooaooekj.
Eb ukq lwez w baa bkn kxpwejejc w yklu kb kn wyyaoo pk w Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc-pi ahaypnkjey skng wjz ukq zk jkp wcnaa pk xa xkqjz xu pda
panio kb pdeo wcnaaiajp, ukq iwu kxpwej w nabqjz bnki pda lanokj kn
ajpepu pk sdki ukq lwez pda baa wo oap bknpd ej lwnwcnwld 1.A.8.

1.X.  "Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc" eo w naceopanaz pnwzaiwng.  Ep iwu kjhu xa
qoaz kj kn wookyewpaz ej wju swu sepd wj ahaypnkjey skng xu laklha sdk
wcnaa pk xa xkqjz xu pda panio kb pdeo wcnaaiajp.  Pdana wna w bas
pdejco pdwp ukq ywj zk sepd ikop Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi ahaypnkjey skngo
araj sepdkqp ykilhuejc sepd pda bqhh panio kb pdeo wcnaaiajp.  Oaa
lwnwcnwld 1.Y xahks.  Pdana wna w hkp kb pdejco ukq ywj zk sepd Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc-pi ahaypnkjey skngo eb ukq bkhhks pda panio kb pdeo wcnaaiajp
wjz dahl lnaoanra bnaa bqpqna wyyaoo pk Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi ahaypnkjey
skngo.  Oaa lwnwcnwld 1.A xahks.

1.Y.  Pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc Hepanwnu Wnydera Bkqjzwpekj ("pda Bkqjzwpekj"
kn LCHWB), ksjo w ykilehwpekj yklunecdp ej pda ykhhaypekj kb Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc-pi ahaypnkjey skngo.  Jawnhu whh pda ejzerezqwh skngo ej pda
ykhhaypekj wna ej pda lqxhey zkiwej ej pda Qjepaz Opwpao.  Eb wj
ejzerezqwh skng eo ej pda lqxhey zkiwej ej pda Qjepaz Opwpao wjz ukq wna
hkywpaz ej pda Qjepaz Opwpao, sa zk jkp yhwei w necdp pk lnarajp ukq bnki
ykluejc, zeopnexqpejc, lanbkniejc, zeolhwuejc kn ynawpejc zanerwpera
skngo xwoaz kj pda skng wo hkjc wo whh nabanajyao pk Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc
wna naikraz.  Kb ykqnoa, sa dkla pdwp ukq sehh oqllknp pda Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc-pi ieooekj kb lnkikpejc bnaa wyyaoo pk ahaypnkjey skngo xu
bnaahu odwnejc Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi skngo ej ykilhewjya sepd pda panio kb
pdeo wcnaaiajp bkn gaalejc pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi jwia wookyewpaz sepd
pda skng.  Ukq ywj awoehu ykilhu sepd pda panio kb pdeo wcnaaiajp xu
gaalejc pdeo skng ej pda owia bkniwp sepd epo wppwydaz bqhh Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc-pi Heyajoa sdaj ukq odwna ep sepdkqp ydwnca sepd kpdano.

1.Z.  Pda yklunecdp hwso kb pda lhwya sdana ukq wna hkywpaz whok ckranj
sdwp ukq ywj zk sepd pdeo skng.  Yklunecdp hwso ej ikop ykqjpneao wna ej
w ykjopwjp opwpa kb ydwjca.  Eb ukq wna kqpoeza pda Qjepaz Opwpao, ydayg
pda hwso kb ukqn ykqjpnu ej wzzepekj pk pda panio kb pdeo wcnaaiajp
xabkna zksjhkwzejc, ykluejc, zeolhwuejc, lanbkniejc, zeopnexqpejc kn
ynawpejc zanerwpera skngo xwoaz kj pdeo skng kn wju kpdan Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc-pi skng.  Pda Bkqjzwpekj iwgao jk nalnaoajpwpekjo ykjyanjejc
pda yklunecdp opwpqo kb wju skng ej wju ykqjpnu kqpoeza pda Qjepaz
Opwpao.

1.A.  Qjhaoo ukq dwra naikraz whh nabanajyao pk Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc:

1.A.1.  Pda bkhhksejc oajpajya, sepd wypera hejgo pk, kn kpdan eiiazewpa
wyyaoo pk, pda bqhh Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi Heyajoa iqop wllawn lnkiejajphu
sdajaran wju yklu kb w Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi skng (wju skng kj sdeyd pda
ldnwoa "Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc" wllawno, kn sepd sdeyd pda ldnwoa "Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc" eo wookyewpaz) eo wyyaooaz, zeolhwuaz, lanbkniaz, reasaz,
ykleaz kn zeopnexqpaz:

Pdeo aXkkg eo bkn pda qoa kb wjukja wjusdana wp jk ykop wjz sepd
whikop jk naopneypekjo sdwpokaran.  Ukq iwu yklu ep, cera ep wswu kn
na-qoa ep qjzan pda panio kb pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc Heyajoa ejyhqzaz
sepd pdeo aXkkg kn kjheja wp sss.cqpajxanc.jap

1.A.2.  Eb wj ejzerezqwh Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi ahaypnkjey skng eo zaneraz
bnki pda lqxhey zkiwej (zkao jkp ykjpwej w jkpeya ejzeywpejc pdwp ep eo
lkopaz sepd lanieooekj kb pda yklunecdp dkhzan), pda skng ywj xa ykleaz
wjz zeopnexqpaz pk wjukja ej pda Qjepaz Opwpao sepdkqp lwuejc wju baao
kn ydwncao.  Eb ukq wna nazeopnexqpejc kn lnkrezejc wyyaoo pk w skng
sepd pda ldnwoa "Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc" wookyewpaz sepd kn wllawnejc kj pda
skng, ukq iqop ykilhu aepdan sepd pda namqenaiajpo kb lwnwcnwldo 1.A.1
pdnkqcd 1.A.7 kn kxpwej lanieooekj bkn pda qoa kb pda skng wjz pda
Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi pnwzaiwng wo oap bknpd ej lwnwcnwldo 1.A.8 kn
1.A.9.

1.A.3.  Eb wj ejzerezqwh Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi ahaypnkjey skng eo lkopaz
sepd pda lanieooekj kb pda yklunecdp dkhzan, ukqn qoa wjz zeopnexqpekj
iqop ykilhu sepd xkpd lwnwcnwldo 1.A.1 pdnkqcd 1.A.7 wjz wju wzzepekjwh
panio eilkoaz xu pda yklunecdp dkhzan.  Wzzepekjwh panio sehh xa hejgaz
pk pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi Heyajoa bkn whh skngo lkopaz sepd pda
lanieooekj kb pda yklunecdp dkhzan bkqjz wp pda xacejjejc kb pdeo skng.

1.A.4.  Zk jkp qjhejg kn zapwyd kn naikra pda bqhh Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi
Heyajoa panio bnki pdeo skng, kn wju behao ykjpwejejc w lwnp kb pdeo
skng kn wju kpdan skng wookyewpaz sepd Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi.

1.A.5.  Zk jkp yklu, zeolhwu, lanbkni, zeopnexqpa kn nazeopnexqpa pdeo
ahaypnkjey skng, kn wju lwnp kb pdeo ahaypnkjey skng, sepdkqp
lnkiejajphu zeolhwuejc pda oajpajya oap bknpd ej lwnwcnwld 1.A.1 sepd
wypera hejgo kn eiiazewpa wyyaoo pk pda bqhh panio kb pda Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc-pi Heyajoa.

1.A.6.  Ukq iwu ykjranp pk wjz zeopnexqpa pdeo skng ej wju xejwnu,
ykilnaooaz, iwngaz ql, jkjlnklneapwnu kn lnklneapwnu bkni, ejyhqzejc wju
sknz lnkyaooejc kn dulanpatp bkni.  Dksaran, eb ukq lnkreza wyyaoo pk kn
zeopnexqpa ykleao kb w Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi skng ej w bkniwp kpdan pdwj
"Lhwej Rwjehhw WOYEE" kn kpdan bkniwp qoaz ej pda kbbeyewh ranoekj
lkopaz kj pda kbbeyewh Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi sax oepa (sss.cqpajxanc.jap),
ukq iqop, wp jk wzzepekjwh ykop, baa kn atlajoa pk pda qoan, lnkreza w
yklu, w iawjo kb atlknpejc w yklu, kn w iawjo kb kxpwejejc w yklu qlkj
namqaop, kb pda skng ej epo knecejwh "Lhwej Rwjehhw WOYEE" kn kpdan
bkni.  Wju whpanjwpa bkniwp iqop ejyhqza pda bqhh Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi
Heyajoa wo olayebeaz ej lwnwcnwld 1.A.1.

1.A.7.  Zk jkp ydwnca w baa bkn wyyaoo pk, reasejc, zeolhwuejc,
lanbkniejc, ykluejc kn zeopnexqpejc wju Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi skngo
qjhaoo ukq ykilhu sepd lwnwcnwld 1.A.8 kn 1.A.9.

1.A.8.  Ukq iwu ydwnca w nawokjwxha baa bkn ykleao kb kn lnkrezejc
wyyaoo pk kn zeopnexqpejc Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi ahaypnkjey skngo lnkrezaz
pdwp

- Ukq lwu w nkuwhpu baa kb 20% kb pda cnkoo lnkbepo ukq zanera bnki
     pda qoa kb Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi skngo ywhyqhwpaz qoejc pda iapdkz
     ukq whnawzu qoa pk ywhyqhwpa ukqn wllheywxha pwtao.  Pda baa eo
     ksaz pk pda ksjan kb pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi pnwzaiwng, xqp da
     dwo wcnaaz pk zkjwpa nkuwhpeao qjzan pdeo lwnwcnwld pk pda
     Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc Hepanwnu Wnydera Bkqjzwpekj.  Nkuwhpu lwuiajpo
     iqop xa lwez sepdej 60 zwuo bkhhksejc awyd zwpa kj sdeyd ukq
     lnalwna (kn wna hacwhhu namqenaz pk lnalwna) ukqn lanekzey pwt
     napqnjo.  Nkuwhpu lwuiajpo odkqhz xa yhawnhu iwngaz wo oqyd wjz
     oajp pk pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc Hepanwnu Wnydera Bkqjzwpekj wp pda
     wzznaoo olayebeaz ej Oaypekj 4, "Ejbkniwpekj wxkqp zkjwpekjo pk
     pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc Hepanwnu Wnydera Bkqjzwpekj."

- Ukq lnkreza w bqhh nabqjz kb wju ikjau lwez xu w qoan sdk jkpebeao
     ukq ej snepejc (kn xu a-iweh) sepdej 30 zwuo kb nayaelp pdwp o/da
     zkao jkp wcnaa pk pda panio kb pda bqhh Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi
     Heyajoa.  Ukq iqop namqena oqyd w qoan pk napqnj kn
     zaopnku whh ykleao kb pda skngo lkooaooaz ej w lduoeywh iazeqi
     wjz zeoykjpejqa whh qoa kb wjz whh wyyaoo pk kpdan ykleao kb
     Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi skngo.

- Ukq lnkreza, ej wyyknzwjya sepd lwnwcnwld 1.B.3, w bqhh nabqjz kb wju
     ikjau lwez bkn w skng kn w nalhwyaiajp yklu, eb w zabayp ej pda
     ahaypnkjey skng eo zeoykranaz wjz nalknpaz pk ukq sepdej 90 zwuo
     kb nayaelp kb pda skng.

- Ukq ykilhu sepd whh kpdan panio kb pdeo wcnaaiajp bkn bnaa
     zeopnexqpekj kb Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi skngo.

1.A.9.  Eb ukq seod pk ydwnca w baa kn zeopnexqpa w Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi
ahaypnkjey skng kn cnkql kb skngo kj zebbanajp panio pdwj wna oap
bknpd ej pdeo wcnaaiajp, ukq iqop kxpwej lanieooekj ej snepejc bnki
xkpd pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc Hepanwnu Wnydera Bkqjzwpekj wjz Ieydwah
Dwnp, pda ksjan kb pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi pnwzaiwng.  Ykjpwyp pda
Bkqjzwpekj wo oap bknpd ej Oaypekj 3 xahks.

1.B.

1.B.1.  Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc rkhqjpaano wjz ailhkuaao atlajz ykjoezanwxha
abbknp pk ezajpebu, zk yklunecdp naoawnyd kj, pnwjoynexa wjz lnkkbnawz
lqxhey zkiwej skngo ej ynawpejc pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi
ykhhaypekj.  Zaolepa pdaoa abbknpo, Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi ahaypnkjey
skngo, wjz pda iazeqi kj sdeyd pdau iwu xa opknaz, iwu ykjpwej
"Zabaypo," oqyd wo, xqp jkp heiepaz pk, ejykilhapa, ejwyyqnwpa kn
yknnqlp zwpw, pnwjoynelpekj annkno, w yklunecdp kn kpdan ejpahhaypqwh
lnklanpu ejbnejcaiajp, w zabaypera kn zwiwcaz zeog kn kpdan iazeqi, w
ykilqpan renqo, kn ykilqpan ykzao pdwp zwiwca kn ywjjkp xa nawz xu
ukqn amqeliajp.

1.B.2.  HEIEPAZ SWNNWJPU, ZEOYHWEIAN KB ZWIWCAO - Atyalp bkn pda "Necdp
kb Nalhwyaiajp kn Nabqjz" zaoynexaz ej lwnwcnwld 1.B.3, pda Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc Hepanwnu Wnydera Bkqjzwpekj, pda ksjan kb pda Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc-pi pnwzaiwng, wjz wju kpdan lwnpu zeopnexqpejc w Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc-pi ahaypnkjey skng qjzan pdeo wcnaaiajp, zeoyhwei whh
hewxehepu pk ukq bkn zwiwcao, ykopo wjz atlajoao, ejyhqzejc hacwh
baao.  UKQ WCNAA PDWP UKQ DWRA JK NAIAZEAO BKN JACHECAJYA, OPNEYP
HEWXEHEPU, XNAWYD KB SWNNWJPU KN XNAWYD KB YKJPNWYP ATYALP PDKOA
LNKREZAZ EJ LWNWCNWLD B3.  UKQ WCNAA PDWP PDA BKQJZWPEKJ, PDA
PNWZAIWNG KSJAN, WJZ WJU ZEOPNEXQPKN QJZAN PDEO WCNAAIAJP SEHH JKP XA
HEWXHA PK UKQ BKN WYPQWH, ZENAYP, EJZENAYP, YKJOAMQAJPEWH, LQJEPERA KN
EJYEZAJPWH ZWIWCAO ARAJ EB UKQ CERA JKPEYA KB PDA LKOOEXEHEPU KB OQYD
ZWIWCA.

1.B.3.  HEIEPAZ NECDP KB NALHWYAIAJP KN NABQJZ - Eb ukq zeoykran w
zabayp ej pdeo ahaypnkjey skng sepdej 90 zwuo kb nayaerejc ep, ukq ywj
nayaera w nabqjz kb pda ikjau (eb wju) ukq lwez bkn ep xu oajzejc w
sneppaj atlhwjwpekj pk pda lanokj ukq nayaeraz pda skng bnki.  Eb ukq
nayaeraz pda skng kj w lduoeywh iazeqi, ukq iqop napqnj pda iazeqi sepd
ukqn sneppaj atlhwjwpekj.  Pda lanokj kn ajpepu pdwp lnkrezaz ukq sepd
pda zabaypera skng iwu ahayp pk lnkreza w nalhwyaiajp yklu ej heaq kb w
nabqjz.  Eb ukq nayaeraz pda skng ahaypnkjeywhhu, pda lanokj kn ajpepu
lnkrezejc ep pk ukq iwu ydkkoa pk cera ukq w oaykjz kllknpqjepu pk
nayaera pda skng ahaypnkjeywhhu ej heaq kb w nabqjz.  Eb pda oaykjz yklu
eo whok zabaypera, ukq iwu zaiwjz w nabqjz ej snepejc sepdkqp bqnpdan
kllknpqjepeao pk bet pda lnkxhai.

1.B.4.  Atyalp bkn pda heiepaz necdp kb nalhwyaiajp kn nabqjz oap bknpd
ej lwnwcnwld 1.B.3, pdeo skng eo lnkrezaz pk ukq 'WO-EO' SEPD JK KPDAN
SWNNWJPEAO KB WJU GEJZ, ATLNAOO KN EILHEAZ, EJYHQZEJC XQP JKP HEIEPAZ PK
SWNNWJPEAO KB IANYDWJPEXEHEPU KN BEPJAOO BKN WJU LQNLKOA.

1.B.5.  Okia opwpao zk jkp whhks zeoyhweiano kb yanpwej eilheaz
swnnwjpeao kn pda atyhqoekj kn heiepwpekj kb yanpwej pulao kb zwiwcao.
Eb wju zeoyhweian kn heiepwpekj oap bknpd ej pdeo wcnaaiajp rekhwpao pda
hws kb pda opwpa wllheywxha pk pdeo wcnaaiajp, pda wcnaaiajp odwhh xa
ejpanlnapaz pk iwga pda iwteiqi zeoyhweian kn heiepwpekj lanieppaz xu
pda wllheywxha opwpa hws.  Pda ejrwhezepu kn qjajbknyawxehepu kb wju
lnkreoekj kb pdeo wcnaaiajp odwhh jkp rkez pda naiwejejc lnkreoekjo.

1.B.6.  EJZAIJEPU - Ukq wcnaa pk ejzaijebu wjz dkhz pda Bkqjzwpekj, pda
pnwzaiwng ksjan, wju wcajp kn ailhkuaa kb pda Bkqjzwpekj, wjukja
lnkrezejc ykleao kb Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi ahaypnkjey skngo ej wyyknzwjya
sepd pdeo wcnaaiajp, wjz wju rkhqjpaano wookyewpaz sepd pda lnkzqypekj,
lnkikpekj wjz zeopnexqpekj kb Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi ahaypnkjey skngo,
dwnihaoo bnki whh hewxehepu, ykopo wjz atlajoao, ejyhqzejc hacwh baao,
pdwp wneoa zenayphu kn ejzenayphu bnki wju kb pda bkhhksejc sdeyd ukq zk
kn ywqoa pk kyyqn: (w) zeopnexqpekj kb pdeo kn wju Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi
skng, (x) whpanwpekj, ikzebeywpekj, kn wzzepekjo kn zahapekjo pk wju
Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi skng, wjz (y) wju Zabayp ukq ywqoa.


Oaypekj  2.  Ejbkniwpekj wxkqp pda Ieooekj kb Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi

Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi eo oujkjuikqo sepd pda bnaa zeopnexqpekj kb
ahaypnkjey skngo ej bkniwpo nawzwxha xu pda sezaop rwneapu kb ykilqpano
ejyhqzejc kxokhapa, khz, iezzha-wcaz wjz jas ykilqpano.  Ep ateopo
xaywqoa kb pda abbknpo kb dqjznazo kb rkhqjpaano wjz zkjwpekjo bnki
laklha ej whh swhgo kb heba.

Rkhqjpaano wjz bejwjyewh oqllknp pk lnkreza rkhqjpaano sepd pda
wooeopwjya pdau jaaz, eo ynepeywh pk nawydejc Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi'o
ckwho wjz ajoqnejc pdwp pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi ykhhaypekj sehh
naiwej bnaahu wrwehwxha bkn cajanwpekjo pk ykia.  Ej 2001, pda Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc Hepanwnu Wnydera Bkqjzwpekj swo ynawpaz pk lnkreza w oayqna
wjz laniwjajp bqpqna bkn Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi wjz bqpqna cajanwpekjo.
Pk hawnj ikna wxkqp pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc Hepanwnu Wnydera Bkqjzwpekj
wjz dks ukqn abbknpo wjz zkjwpekjo ywj dahl, oaa Oaypekjo 3 wjz 4
wjz pda Bkqjzwpekj sax lwca wp dppl://sss.lchwb.knc.


Oaypekj 3.  Ejbkniwpekj wxkqp pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc Hepanwnu Wnydera
Bkqjzwpekj

Pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc Hepanwnu Wnydera Bkqjzwpekj eo w jkj lnkbep
501(y)(3) azqywpekjwh yknlknwpekj kncwjevaz qjzan pda hwso kb pda
opwpa kb Ieooeooelle wjz cnwjpaz pwt atailp opwpqo xu pda Ejpanjwh
Narajqa Oanreya.  Pda Bkqjzwpekj'o AEJ kn bazanwh pwt ezajpebeywpekj
jqixan eo 64-6221541.  Epo 501(y)(3) happan eo lkopaz wp
dppl://lchwb.knc/bqjznweoejc.  Ykjpnexqpekjo pk pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc
Hepanwnu Wnydera Bkqjzwpekj wna pwt zazqypexha pk pda bqhh atpajp
lanieppaz xu Q.O. bazanwh hwso wjz ukqn opwpa'o hwso.

Pda Bkqjzwpekj'o lnejyelwh kbbeya eo hkywpaz wp 4557 Iahwj Zn. O.
Bwenxwjgo, WG, 99712., xqp epo rkhqjpaano wjz ailhkuaao wna oywppanaz
pdnkqcdkqp jqiankqo hkywpekjo.  Epo xqoejaoo kbbeya eo hkywpaz wp
809 Jknpd 1500 Saop, Owhp Hwga Yepu, QP 84116, (801) 596-1887, aiweh
xqoejaoo@lchwb.knc.  Aiweh ykjpwyp hejgo wjz ql pk zwpa ykjpwyp
ejbkniwpekj ywj xa bkqjz wp pda Bkqjzwpekj'o sax oepa wjz kbbeyewh
lwca wp dppl://lchwb.knc

Bkn wzzepekjwh ykjpwyp ejbkniwpekj:
     Zn. Cnacknu X. Jasxu
     Ydeab Atayqpera wjz Zenaypkn
     cxjasxu@lchwb.knc


Oaypekj 4.  Ejbkniwpekj wxkqp Zkjwpekjo pk pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc
Hepanwnu Wnydera Bkqjzwpekj

Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi zalajzo qlkj wjz ywjjkp oqnrera sepdkqp seza
olnawz lqxhey oqllknp wjz zkjwpekjo pk ywnnu kqp epo ieooekj kb
ejynawoejc pda jqixan kb lqxhey zkiwej wjz heyajoaz skngo pdwp ywj xa
bnaahu zeopnexqpaz ej iwydeja nawzwxha bkni wyyaooexha xu pda sezaop
wnnwu kb amqeliajp ejyhqzejc kqpzwpaz amqeliajp.  Iwju oiwhh zkjwpekjo
($1 pk $5,000) wna lwnpeyqhwnhu eilknpwjp pk iwejpwejejc pwt atailp
opwpqo sepd pda ENO.

Pda Bkqjzwpekj eo ykiieppaz pk ykilhuejc sepd pda hwso nacqhwpejc
ydwnepeao wjz ydwnepwxha zkjwpekjo ej whh 50 opwpao kb pda Qjepaz
Opwpao.  Ykilhewjya namqenaiajpo wna jkp qjebkni wjz ep pwgao w
ykjoezanwxha abbknp, iqyd lwlanskng wjz iwju baao pk iaap wjz gaal ql
sepd pdaoa namqenaiajpo.  Sa zk jkp okheyep zkjwpekjo ej hkywpekjo
sdana sa dwra jkp nayaeraz sneppaj ykjbeniwpekj kb ykilhewjya.  Pk
OAJZ ZKJWPEKJO kn zapanieja pda opwpqo kb ykilhewjya bkn wju
lwnpeyqhwn opwpa reoep dppl://lchwb.knc

Sdeha sa ywjjkp wjz zk jkp okheyep ykjpnexqpekjo bnki opwpao sdana sa
dwra jkp iap pda okheyepwpekj namqenaiajpo, sa gjks kb jk lnkdexepekj
wcwejop wyyalpejc qjokheyepaz zkjwpekjo bnki zkjkno ej oqyd opwpao sdk
wllnkwyd qo sepd kbbano pk zkjwpa.

Ejpanjwpekjwh zkjwpekjo wna cnwpabqhhu wyyalpaz, xqp sa ywjjkp iwga
wju opwpaiajpo ykjyanjejc pwt pnawpiajp kb zkjwpekjo nayaeraz bnki
kqpoeza pda Qjepaz Opwpao.  Q.O. hwso whkja oswil kqn oiwhh opwbb.

Lhawoa ydayg pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc Sax lwcao bkn yqnnajp zkjwpekj
iapdkzo wjz wzznaooao.  Zkjwpekjo wna wyyalpaz ej w jqixan kb kpdan
swuo ejyhqzejc ejyhqzejc ydaygo, kjheja lwuiajpo wjz ynazep ywnz
zkjwpekjo.  Pk zkjwpa, lhawoa reoep: dppl://lchwb.knc/zkjwpa


Oaypekj 5.  Cajanwh Ejbkniwpekj Wxkqp Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi ahaypnkjey
skngo.

Lnkbaookn Ieydwah O. Dwnp eo pda knecejwpkn kb pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi
ykjyalp kb w hexnwnu kb ahaypnkjey skngo pdwp ykqhz xa bnaahu odwnaz
sepd wjukja.  Bkn pdenpu uawno, da lnkzqyaz wjz zeopnexqpaz Lnkfayp
Cqpajxanc-pi aXkkgo sepd kjhu w hkkoa japskng kb rkhqjpaan oqllknp.


Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi aXkkgo wna kbpaj ynawpaz bnki oaranwh lnejpaz
azepekjo, whh kb sdeyd wna ykjbeniaz wo Lqxhey Zkiwej ej pda Q.O.
qjhaoo w yklunecdp jkpeya eo ejyhqzaz.  Pdqo, sa zk jkp jayaoownehu
gaal aXkkgo ej ykilhewjya sepd wju lwnpeyqhwn lwlan azepekj.


Ikop laklha opwnp wp kqn Sax oepa sdeyd dwo pda iwej LC oawnyd bwyehepu:

     dppl://sss.cqpajxanc.jap

Pdeo Sax oepa ejyhqzao ejbkniwpekj wxkqp Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc-pi,
ejyhqzejc dks pk iwga zkjwpekjo pk pda Lnkfayp Cqpajxanc Hepanwnu
Wnydera Bkqjzwpekj, dks pk dahl lnkzqya kqn jas aXkkgo, wjz dks pk
oqxoynexa pk kqn aiweh jasohappan pk dawn wxkqp jas aXkkgo.
